---
title: "Fun to Program -- Prime numbers"
date: 2013-08-05T00:00:29+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-prime
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## Prime numbers

A [prime number](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_number) (or a prime) is a
natural number greater than 1 that has no positive divisors other than 1 and
itself.

Let's check simple code snippets to obtain prime numbers via the same trial
division algorithm implemented in different languages to study the following:

* basic for-loop syntax
* relative execution speed

Please note this algorithm to obtain prime numbers is not the best one.

### Shell

Here is a shell program to search the prime numbers.

Source code for the Shell script: prime


{{< snippet "examples/prime/sh/prime" >}}


Let's check time to compute prime numbers up to some numbers.

Behavior of the shell script

{{< snippet "examples/prime/sh/prime-test.log" >}}


### Python

Here is a Python program for the prime numbers.

Source code for the Python script: prime


{{< snippet "examples/prime/python/prime" >}}


Behavior of the Perl script

{{< snippet "examples/prime/perl/prime-test.log" >}}


### Lua

Here is a Lua program for the prime numbers with BASIC style "`for`".

Source code for the Lua script: prime


{{< snippet "examples/prime/lua/prime" >}}


Here is an alternative Lua program with "`for ... in `" and a iterator function.

Source code for the Lua script with "`for ... in `": prime0


{{< snippet "examples/prime/lua/prime0" >}}



Behavior of the Lua script

{{< snippet "examples/prime/lua/prime-test.log" >}}


### Perl

Here is a Perl program for the prime numbers.

Source code for the Perl script: prime


{{< snippet "examples/prime/perl/prime" >}}


Behavior of the Perl script

{{< snippet "examples/prime/perl/prime-test.log" >}}


### C

#### C with the array

Here is a C program with the array for the prime numbers.

Source code for the C program with the array: prime.c


{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-array/prime.c" >}}


Let's compile this into a binary executable.

Compilation of the C program with the array

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-array/prime.log" >}}


Behavior of the C program with the array

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-array/prime-test.log" >}}


#### C with the list

Here is a C program with the list for the prime numbers.

Source code for the C program with the list: prime.c


{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-list/prime.c" >}}


TIP: It is a good practice to free memory properly to avoid [common errors in C dynamic memory allocation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_dynamic_memory_allocation#Common_errors) even when OS may take care.

Let's compile this into a binary executable.

Compilation of the C program with the list

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-list/prime.log" >}}


Behavior of the C program with the list

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-list/prime-test.log" >}}


#### C with the list (variants)

Since this is very good example to learn C with the dynamic memory allocation, I made a combination code of several styles.

Source code for the C program with the list: prime-all.c


{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-list/prime-all.c" >}}


This code uses CPP macro to change its style.

* "`#define STYLE 0`" enables the basic style of the `struct` and `typedef` combination.
* "`#define STYLE 1`" enables the shorthand style of the `struct` and `typedef` combination.
* "`#define STYLE 2`" enables the alternative style of the `struct` and `typedef` combination using the `typedef` feature allowing the incomplete type. (Vala generated C code uses this style.)
* "`#define STYLE 3`" enables the alternative style of memory allocation using `malloc` instead of `calloc`.
* "`#define STYLE 4`" enables the `while`-loop style instead of `for`-loop.

Here, I used the `_primelist` tag for `struct` to distinguish from the
`primelist` identifier for `typedef`.   The `_primelist` tags can be replaced
with `primelist` without problem in C since `struct` tags and typedefs are in
separate namespaces in C (But C++ is a different story ...).

The first 3 memory allocation styles generate exactly the same code.  The
difference between `calloc` and `malloc` codes is because only `calloc` sets
the allocated memory to zero.

The "`-D NAME=DEFINITION`" compiler option is processed effectively as
"`#define NAME DEFINITION`" at the top of the source. (See more in the info
page for CPP.)

Let's compile this into 5 binaries using this "`-D NAME=DEFINITION`" compiler
option.

Compilation of the C program with the list in several styles

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-list/prime-all.log" >}}


All these generated binary executable programs work the same (i.e., the same execution speed).

The `prime-all.c` code can be simplified to `prime.c` by removing preprocessor conditionals with `unifdef`(1).

Removal of preprocessor conditionals from `prime-all.c`

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-list/prime-alt.log" >}}


### Vala (Glib)

Here is a Vala program for the prime numbers using only Glib.

(This is a bad program example. I know this is problematic only after making this program and analyzing the problem I faced. See [Benchmark](#benchmark).)

Source code for the Vala program: prime.vala


{{< snippet "examples/prime/vala/prime.vala" >}}


Behavior of the Vala program

{{< snippet "examples/prime/vala/prime-test.log" >}}


Havoc Pennington said "[g_list_last() and g_list_append() are defined to be O(n) operations; they are not fast for long lists. GList is modeled on the lists found in Scheme, Haskell, etc. which behave the same way.](https://mail.gnome.org/archives/gtk-devel-list/2000-October/msg00059.html)"  I should have known ...

### Vala (Gee)

Here is a Vala program for the prime numbers using [Gee](https://live.gnome.org/Libgee).

(This is an improved program example over previous Vala (GLib) one. See [Benchmark](#benchmark).)

`ArrayList<G>` provided by Gee is used instead of `List<G>` provided by Glib.  This type of list structure is very fast for adding data at the end of the list.

Source code for the Vala program: prime.vala


{{< snippet "examples/prime/vala-gee/prime.vala" >}}


Behavior of the Vala program

{{< snippet "examples/prime/vala-gee/prime-test.log" >}}


### Benchmark

Here are benchmark results of various program languages.

Speed benchmark of various program languages

<!--  table copied from "examples/prime/bench/time-table.txt" foo_ -->

|Program| real(2^16) | user(2^16) | sys(2^16) | real(2^20) | user(2^20) | sys(2^20) |
|-------| ----------:| ----------:| ---------:| ----------:| ----------:| ---------:|
|Shell| 23.91|19.38|0.48| -- | -- | -- |
|Python| 0.19|0.19|0.00|5.58|5.58|0.00 |
|Lua| 0.16|0.16|0.00|5.23|5.22|0.00 |
|Lua (for ... in)| -- | -- | -- |5.11|5.10|0.01|
|Perl| 0.16|0.16|0.00|4.86|4.86|0.00|
|C (array)| 0.00|0.00|0.00|0.16|0.16|0.00|
|C (list)| 0.00|0.00|0.00|0.17|0.17|0.00|
|Vala (glib)| 0.07|0.06|0.00|9.45|9.44|0.00|
|Vala (gee)| 0.02|0.02|0.00|0.57|0.57|0.00|

Here, the time reported by the `/usr/bin/time -p` command is in POSIX standard 1003.2 style:

* `real`: Elapsed real (wall clock) time used by the process, in seconds.
* `user`: Total number of CPU-seconds that the process used directly (in user mode), in seconds.
* `sys`: Total number of CPU-seconds used by the system on behalf of the process (in kernel mode), in seconds.

Please disregard minor differences such as 20% since this benchmark is not
meant to be very accurate.

The speed differences are several orders of magnitudes.

A code written in any compiler language is faster than one written in any interpreter in normal situation.

But looking at `real (2^20)` case, the Vala program with GLib result is very
odd. For now, let me just say "The root cause is the way GLib is used.  There
are many operations to add an item at the end of the long list. This is slow
o(n) operation."

This will be analyzed in [Profiling prime](/en/2013/08/13/fun2prog-debug-4/#profiling-prime).

TIP: The use of the compiler does not guarantee the faster code.  Algorithm is important.

<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
