---
title: "Fun to Program -- Embedded Lua"
date: 2013-08-17T00:00:50+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-lua
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## Embedded Lua

The Lua interpreter embedded into a small C program offers an ideal
configuration system.  It can execute any functions of the hosting C program
under specified conditions and sequences with arbitrary parameter values.

* Lua is small.
* Lua has simple procedural syntax.
* Lua has powerful data constructs based on associative arrays. 
* Lua has extensible semantics.
* Lua is dynamically typed.
* Lua has automatic memory management with incremental garbage collection.

Learn Lua:

* http://www.lua.org/ 
* http://www.lua.org/manual/5.1/

In Debian, Lua interpreter is offered as a shared library linkable from any C
codes.

### Pseudo stack

The hosting C program and the embedded Lua interpreter needs to communicate
each other.  This communication is done by passing parameters via the shared
Lua pseudo stack.  Here is a private library function to print out its content.

dump.c defining the dump_stack(lua_State* L) function source


{{< snippet "examples/c2lua/dump.c" >}}


dump.h defining the dump_stack(lua_State* L) function header


{{< snippet "examples/c2lua/dump.h" >}}


Here is an example hosting C program of Lua interpreter `luastack.c`.  This
manipulates the shared parameter passing pseudo stack from the hosting C
program.

The hosting luastack.c source


{{< snippet "examples/c2lua/luastack.c" >}}


Let's compile these and run `luastack`.

Compile and run of luastack

{{< snippet "examples/c2lua/luastack.log" >}}


### C + Lua

Let's write a hosting C program `luahost.c` which can load a Lua script
`script.lua` into the embedded Lua interpreter.

luahost.c source


{{< snippet "examples/c2lua/luahost.c" >}}


script.lua source


{{< snippet "examples/c2lua/script.lua" >}}


Let's see how they interact.

Compile and run of luahost

{{< snippet "examples/c2lua/luahost.log" >}}


Lua program can call C functions and use values of C variables such as ones
passed from OS environment variables via the hosting C program.  The hosting C
program can use the execution result of the Lua script.

<!-- Lua SWIG LuaJIT FFI http://luajit.org/ -->

<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
