---
title: "Fun to Program -- Debug: level 4"
date: 2013-08-13T00:00:37+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-debug-4
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## Debug: level 4

Dynamically tracing program execution to understand the general behavior of the program is
the major part of debugging.

There are several ways to trace programs interactively.  The `perf` tool
facilitate this without any modifications to the source.

### perf

The `linux-tools-*` package matching your running kernel provides the `perf`
command on your system.

The `perf` command provides Linux profiling with performance counters.

* `perf stat`: obtain event counts (better `time`(1), `sar`(1), ...)
* `perf record`: record events for later reporting
* `perf report`: break down events by process, function, etc. (better `strace`(1), `ltrace`(1), ...)
* `perf annotate`: annotate assembly or source code with event counts
* `perf top`: see live event count (better `top`(1) with disassembler but need to be `root`)

Unlike other profiling tools, this does not require the recompilation of the
source nor the source file.  This is also very light weight.  But this is a
Linux specific tool.

See [perf: Linux profiling with performance counters](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/) for more information.

### Profiling prime

Let's investigate why the compiled Vala `prime` program with Glib was
very slow as described in [Benchmark](/en/2013/08/17/fun2prog-prime/#benchmark) using the `perf stat`
command.

Global performance counter stats for the various `prime` programs.

<!-- "examples/prime/bench/perf.txt" -->

|Performance counter stats|C|Vala (Gee)|Python|Vala (GLib) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|seconds time elapsed|0.167983287|0.575971153|5.645002396|9.481985276 |
|task-clock|167.373524|575.422353|5644.228565|9480.929621 |
|context-switches|1|1|9|19 |
|cpu-migrations|1|1|3|1 |
|page-faults|785|643|3,380|1,042 |
|cycles|514,939,216|1,706,530,307|16,964,435,086|27,931,279,895 |
|stalled-cycles-frontend|177,126,811|804,510,638|3,982,808,734|23,873,332,537 |
|stalled-cycles-backend|25,597,018|225,726,193|1,219,951,714|18,391,463,018 |
|branches|57,299,268|270,933,180|7,548,747,415|3,431,684,225 |
|branch-misses|431,965|534,024|48,326,241|616,496 |

You see the compiled Vala `prime` program with GLib has much more
stalled-cycles.  This seems to be the primary source of its slowness. (The
execution speed of the interpreted Python `prime` program is more than double
of that of the compiled Vala one.  If the value of the stalled-cycles is not as
high for the compiled Vala `prime` program, the execution speed of the
interpreted Python one should be much slower.)

You can obtain interactive performance counter stats with the following method.
 
Method to obtain interactive performance counter stats.
```
$ perf record ./prime "$(echo 2^20 | bc)">/dev/null


$ perf report
```

This brings out interactive performance counter stats itemized for each
function calls etc.  The key parts of results are the following.

Itemized performance counter stats for `prime` from the C (list) source

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-list/perf.reportx" >}}


Itemized performance counter stats for the compiled Vala `prime` with Gee.

{{< snippet "examples/prime/vala-gee/perf.reportx" >}}


Itemized performance counter stats for the interpreted Python `prime`.

{{< snippet "examples/prime/python/perf.reportx" >}}


Itemized performance counter stats for the compiled Vala `prime` with GLib.

{{< snippet "examples/prime/vala/perf.reportx" >}}


Now you see the `g_list_last` function in the `libglib-2.0` library is the big
overhead making the compiled Vala `prime` program with GLib to run very
slow.  You get more information from the interactive screen by pressing ENTER
on the line of the `g_list_last` function and then on the `Annotate
g_list_last` line.

Annotated g_list_last
```
g_list_last                                                                     
       │
       │    Disassembly of section .text:
       │
       │    0000000000047480 <g_list_last>:
       │      test   %rdi,%rdi
       │      mov    %rdi,%rax
       │    ↓ jne    13
       │    ↓ jmp    1e
       │      nop
 13.28 │10:   mov    %rdx,%rax
       │13:   mov    0x8(%rax),%rdx
 86.72 │      test   %rdx,%rdx
       │    ↑ jne    10
       │      repz   retq
       │1e:   repz   retq
```

This looks like searching the end of list by scanning from the head of the
list.  This not only wastes many instructions but also runs through
large memory space causing stalled-cycles for the cached memory system.

The assembly code "`repz   retq`" did not make sense to me.  As I searched the
web for the answer, I found this to be for http://repzret.org/p/repzret/[the code
optimization of the branch prediction mechanism].  For us to read the generated
assembly code, this is practically the same as "`retq`", though.

In the ([C with the list](/en/2013/08/17/fun2prog-prime/#c-with-the-list)) source, the code is compact and
the pointer to the tail of the list is kept in the `tail` pointer variable
which is updated without scanning the whole list from the head.

Let's output the Vala source with GLib into C source using the `valac -C`
command and touch it up into a readable C source to inspect the situation.

A equivalent C source for the Vala source with GLib.

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-glib/prime.c" >}}


Here, the Vala does not generate a C source with the tail tracking for the
list.  The `p = g_list_append (p, GINT_TO_POINTER (n));` code should cause many
calls to `g_list_last` for every prime numbers found. No wonder `g_list_last`
is called so many times.

The use of [Gee](https://live.gnome.org/Libgee) solves this problem.


<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
