---
title: "Fun to Program -- Process"
date: 2013-08-17T00:00:30+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-process
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## Process

Here are some practice results to play with
[process](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Process_(computing)) and
[inter process communication (IPC)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter-process_communication)
([signal](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_signal) and [network socket](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_socket))
on Debian wheezy.

### Signal

Signal is explained in `signal`(7).

Here are default actions for notable signals.

* Default action is to terminate the process.
    * `SIGHUP` = 1 : Death of controlling process
    * `SIGINT` = 2 : Interrupt from keyboard (Ctrl-`C`)
    * `SIGKILL` = 9 : Kill signal (**non-trappable**)
    * `SIGALRM` = 14 : Timer signal from alarm(2)
    * `SIGTERM` = 15 : Termination signal (default for `kill`)
    * `SIGUSR1` = 10 : User-defined signal 1
    * `SIGUSR2` = 12 : User-defined signal 2
* Default action is to terminate the process and dump core.
    * `SIGQUIT` = 3 : Quit from keyboard (Ctrl-`\`)
    * `SIGTRAP` = 5 : Trace/breakpoint trap
    * `SIGSEGV` = 11 : Invalid memory reference
* Default action is to continue the process
    * `SIGCONT` = 18 : Continue if stopped
* Default action is to stop the process.
    * `SIGSTOP` = 19 : Stop process (**non-trappable**)
    * `SIGTSTP` = 20 : Stop typed at tty (Ctrl-`Z`)
* Default action is to ignore the signal.
    * `SIGWINCH` = 28 : Gracefully shutdown the worker processes (httpd, non-POSIX)

I can check signal assignment situation quickly with the Bash builtin "`kill -l`"
command.  (Not with other shells and command!)

List of signal names and signal numbers with the Bash builtin "`kill -l`"

{{< snippet "examples/process/sh/kill-l.log" >}}


TIP: Please note that `SIGABRT` and `SIGIOT` share the same signal value 6; and
`SIGIO` and `SIGLOST` share the same signal value 29.

### Shell: kill

The `kill` commands behave differently depending on which one used.  Let's
check their syntax to send signals.

The example of `kill` commands

{{< snippet "examples/process/sh/kill.log" >}}


* Only the Bash builtin `kill` can use jobspec such as `%1` as its argument.
* If signal number argument is given to "`/bin/kill -l`", there should be no space before it.

### Shell: trap

The `trap` command can trap signals.

Example shell code with trap and infinite loop.


{{< snippet "examples/process/sh/sigtrap" >}}


Let's play with this on the Bash shell.

<!--  This was not easy to automate XXX FIXME XXX manual. -->

Example of kill used with `./sigtrap`

{{< snippet "examples/process/sh/sigtrap.txt" >}}


If you are not on the Bash shell, you have to use PID "`10951`", instead of jobspec "`%1`".

When writing a shell script which is usually the Dash shell, PID changes every
invocation.  The use of `kill` is non-trivial for such case.  So we use the
`killall`(1) command instead.

Example of `killall` used with `./sigtrap`

{{< snippet "examples/process/sh/sigtrap.log" >}}


The most common use of the `trap` command is to set up a hook script for the
program [exit](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exit_(operating_system)).  Here a special signal `EXIT` is used in addition to other normal
signals with the `trap` command.  This `EXIT` signal is raised when shell
script itself exits without external signals.

Example shell code with trap and remove a file.


{{< snippet "examples/process/sh/traprm" >}}


Let's play with this.

Example of `./traprm`

{{< snippet "examples/process/sh/traprm.log" >}}


### Shell: new process

Shell can start a new process easily by:

* starting another shell program as a command.
* starting a block of shell code list enclosed in `( ... )` as subshell.

TIP: Use of `&` after starting the new process enables the current shell to
continue processing the subsequent part of the current shell and the new
process in parrallel.  It moves the new process to the background.

TIP: Use the alternative syntax of a block of shell code list enclosed in
`{ ... ; }` to execute them in the current shell environment.


### Python: new process

Python can start a new process easily by:

* starting a command "`foo`" using the `os.system("foo")` function after "`import os`".
* starting a command "`foo`" using the `os.popen("foo")` function after "`import os`".

TIP: The new subprocess module can be used to replace many process related
modules and functions to make them more secure easily.  See
[subprocess — Subprocess management](http://docs.python.org/3.3/library/subprocess.html)

### Lua: new process

Lua can start a new process easily by:

* starting a command "`foo`" using the `os.execute("foo")`.
* starting a command "`foo`" using the `io.popen("foo")`.

### C: new process

Let's execute a command as a new process from the C program in 3 ways.

* `system`(3) : The `system()` function starts a command by calling "`/bin/sh -c`" command, and returns after its completion.  During execution of the command, `SIGCHLD` will be blocked, and `SIGINT` and `SIGQUIT` will be ignored.
* `popen`(3) : The `popen()` function opens a process by creating a [pipe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anonymous_pipe)(read-only or write-only), [forking](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fork_(operating_system)), and invoking the shell.
* `fork`(2) + `exec`(3) : The `fork()` function creates a new process by duplicating the calling process.  The `exec()` family of functions replaces the current process image with a new process image.

#### C: system

Let's start a command from the C program with `system`(3) while checking environment variables.

Command execution: `system.c`


{{< snippet "examples/process/c/system.c" >}}


Run `./system`

{{< snippet "examples/process/c/system.log" >}}


#### C: popen

Let's start a child process with `popen`(3) and pass messages via pipe from the [child process](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Child_process) to the [parent process](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parent_process).

Command execution: `popen.c`


{{< snippet "examples/process/c/popen.c" >}}


Run `./popen`

{{< snippet "examples/process/c/popen.log" >}}


#### C: fork + exec

Let's start a child process with `fork`(2) and pass messages from the [child process](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Child_process) to the [parent process](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parent_process) via pipe.

Fork and exec example: `forkexec.c`


{{< snippet "examples/process/c/forkexec.c" >}}


Run `./forkexec`

{{< snippet "examples/process/c/forkexec.log" >}}


This last method uses the `exec`(3) family of functions with various argument usages.

* `l`-suffix: `execl`, `execlp`, `execle`
    * The argument list available to the new program is directly used as the later part of the arguments.
* `v`-suffix: `execv`, `execvp`, `execvpe`
    * An array of pointers to null-terminated strings are used to represent the argument list available to the new program.
* `p`-suffix: `execlp` `execvp`, `execvpe`
    * This indicates that the function duplicates the shell function for searching an executable file indicated by the `$PATH` environment variable.
* `e`-suffix : `execle` `execvpe`
    * This indicates that the function specifys the environment of the executed program via the argument `envp`.

### C: signal macro

Since the signal number assignment is system dependent, we should use macro to specify signal in the C program.

Signal macros defined in `/usr/include/asm/signal.h`.

{{< snippet "examples/process/c/sig.log" >}}


### C: signal(2)

For the simplicity, I start with the traditional `signal`(2).

TIP: The POSIX.1 `sigaction`(2) is more portable than the `signal`(2).
The effects of `signal`(2) in a multithreaded process are unspecified.  See
`signal`(2) for details.

Signal example: `signal.c`


{{< snippet "examples/process/c/signal.c" >}}


Run `./signal`, etc.

{{< snippet "examples/process/c/signal.log" >}}


### C: sigaction(2)

Let's try basically the same with the new `sigaction`(2) while preventing the
reentrant signal situation.

Signal example: `sigaction.c`


{{< snippet "examples/process/c/sigaction.c" >}}


Run `./sigaction`, etc.

{{< snippet "examples/process/c/sigaction.log" >}}


In above example, `SA_NODEFER` was set for the `SIGHUP` side of code just to
show how to prevent reentrant signal situation explicitly by the `sigaddset`(3)
command.

TIP: You can set up fine grained signal mask with the `sigprocmask`(3).

### httpd in C

Let's try coding a simple httpd server program, `httpd6`.  This can provide good
insight into how the httpd server works with the bottom up approach.  Here is the
design guide line I used.

* IPv6 protocol.
* the port number as the first argument (required, range=1024-60000)
* the document root path as the optional second argument.
* the default document root path as "~/public_html"
* no CGI script support
* no "`..`" in the URL string for security.
* write simple for the easier to understand code.

TIP: See
http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/systems/library/es-nweb/index.html[nweb: a
tiny, safe Web server (static pages only)] for IPv4 protocol example code.  It
comes with detailed explanation on how things work.  (My example is basically a
rewrite for IPv6 in my coding style.)

Common header : `common.h`


{{< snippet "examples/net/c/common.h" >}}


This is a common header file.  Most notable is a macro `log_printf` which
enables to write to the log file with `printf` syntax.

Routine to daemonize httpd6: `main.c`


{{< snippet "examples/net/c/main.c" >}}


This essentially starts a daemonized `httpd6` process.  The daemonized `httpd6`
process is the infinite loop routine.  It creates a
[network socket](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_socket) and listens to the
TCP connection port specified on the command line and assume IPv6 connection.
Every time` httpd6` is hit, it starts a child process to handle the HTTP
request.

Main routine providing httpd6: `httpd6.c`


include::net/c/[](httpd6.c)


This is the routine to handle the HTTP request in the child process of the
daemon.  Since I put HTML protocol related text data in the codes, this is very
top heavy.  But this is relatively simple :-)

You can see this `httpd6` can serve as IPv6 web server.


{{< snippet "examples/net/c/wget.log" >}}


### httpd in Python

Coding in the Python environment provides us with bigger building blocks to
work with than that in the C environment.

The `http.server` module in the Python3 library contains basic HTTP server classes.  Let's use this.

Just like the `argparse` module in [CLI programs: Python](/en/2013/08/17/fun2prog-cli/#python), I read
the library source comments to get good idea.

```
$ /usr/bin/python3 -q
>>> print(sys.path)
['', '/usr/lib/python3.2', '/usr/lib/python3.2/plat-linux2', '/usr/lib/python3.2
/lib-dynload', '/usr/local/lib/python3.2/dist-packages', '/usr/lib/python3/dist-
packages']
>>> import http.server
>>> print (http.server.__file__)
/usr/lib/python3.2/http/server.py
>>> exit()
$ head /usr/lib/python3.2/http/server.py
"""HTTP server classes.

Note: BaseHTTPRequestHandler doesn't implement any HTTP request; see
SimpleHTTPRequestHandler for simple implementations of GET, HEAD and POST,
and CGIHTTPRequestHandler for CGI scripts.

It does, however, optionally implement HTTP/1.1 persistent connections,
as of version 0.3.

Notes on CGIHTTPRequestHandler
```

The `test` function towards the end of the `/usr/lib/python3.2/http/server.py`
file seems to be good template to start with if its HTTP handler is changed to
`SimpleHTTPRequestHandler`.

Simple Python HTTP server: `httpd`

{{< snippet "examples/net/python/httpd" >}}

You can see this `httpd` can serve as IPv4 web server.


{{< snippet "examples/net/python/wget.log" >}}


See:

* ["http.server — HTTP servers" in "The Python Standard Library "](http://docs.python.org/3/library/http.server.html)
* ["BaseHttpServer" in "The Python Wiki"](http://wiki.python.org/moin/BaseHttpServer)


<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
