---
title: "Fun to Program -- Debug: level 1"
date: 2013-08-10T00:00:34+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-debug-1
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## Debug: level 1

Debugging is the major part of programing.

If your code fails by an unknown cause, it is primitive but is often used
technique to embed **logging** codes for key internal parameters.  This logging
must be disabled for the normal program execution.

TIP: Use the `script`(1) command to obtain a file copy of the console output.
Piping the `COMMAND` output as "`COMMAND 2>&1 |tee typescript`" is an
alternative.

If your code assumes something, it is good idea to protect this assumption with
an **assertion** code, i.e., a conditional reporting and aborting code.  If the
assertion code fails, you know you hit a bug.  This is a very effective and
preventive debug method.

Let's review some cliches used to embed such codes.

### Shell logging

Embedding many "`echo "..."`" lines works fine to debug short shell programs.

But it can get tangled with normal output codes.  So disabling them for
production use and removing them later may not be trivial for larger shell
programs.

You can solve this complication by defining a purpose specific `debug`
function.

The `cli-log` program logs an error message if the variable `DEBUG` is set.

Example of a shell code `cli-log` with logging capability.


{{< snippet "examples/cli/sh/cli-log" >}}


Execution example of logging for a shell code `cli-log`.

{{< snippet "examples/cli/sh/cli-log.log" >}}


TIP: Unlike Bash, Dash which offers `/bin/sh` on the recent Debian system does
     not support `$LINENO` for wheezy.

### Python logging

Embedding many "`print("...")`" lines works fine to debug short Python programs.

Let's try to log in a better way as done for the above shell code.

The `cli-log` program logs an error message if the variable `DEBUG` is set.

Example of a Python 3 code `cli-log` with logging capability.


{{< snippet "examples/cli/python/cli-log" >}}


TIP: On Python 2, you should replace "`#!/usr/bin/python3`" with
"`#!/usr/bin/python`"; and "`print(msg, file=sys.stderr)`" with
"`print >> sys.stderr, msg`".

Execution example of logging for a Python code `cli-log`.

{{< snippet "examples/cli/python/cli-log.log" >}}


See:

* ["Logging" in "The Python Tutorial"](http://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/stdlib2.html#logging)
* ["Logging HOWTO" in "Python HOWTOs"](http://docs.python.org/3/howto/logging.html)
* ["Logging Cookbook" in "Python HOWTOs"](http://docs.python.org/3/howto/logging-cookbook.html)

### C logging

Embedding many "`printf(fmt, ...)`" or "`fprintf(stderr, fmt, ...)`" lines
works fine to debug short C programs.

TIP: The `unifdef` command may be handy for removing these useless debug lines
after finishing the debug, if they are enclosed between a pair of macros such
as `#ifdef DEBUG` and `#endif`.

Let's try to log in a better way as done for the above shell and Python codes.

I made a generic C header file `logerr.h` for this purpose.

A C header code `logerr.h` with logging capability.


{{< snippet "examples/cli/c/logerr.h" >}}


Here,

* This `logerr` macro is safe to use even after `if(...)`-construct.
* The global variable `logerr_level` is used to control the logging threadshold of the `logerr` macro.
* The `NLOGERR` macro controls deactivation of the `logerr` macro.

TIP: `do { ... ; } while(0)` is another construct frequently used in the macro definition to avoid breaking `if(...)`-construct.

TIP: GNU extention form of the variadic macro "`, ##__VA_ARGS__`" is used in place of "`, __VA_ARGS__`" to deal with the case of zero extra argument.  See [Variadic Macros](http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/cpp/Variadic-Macros.html).

The `cli-log.c` program logs an error message if the variable `DEBUG` is set or the `-v` option is used.

Example of a C code `cli-log.c` with logging capability.


{{< snippet "examples/cli/c/cli-log.c" >}}


Compile and execution example with logging for a C code `cli-log.c`.

{{< snippet "examples/cli/c/cli-log.log" >}}


You can completely remove logging capability in compile time by defining the `NLOGERR` macro.

Compile and execution example without logging for a C code `cli-log.c`.

{{< snippet "examples/cli/c/cli-log-no.log" >}}


If you have some logging lines which are only needed for testing phase, please
enclose them between a pair of macros such as `#ifdef TESTERRLOG` and `#endif`
and remove them with the `unifdef` command.

TIP: For the serious logging, consider using `syslog`(3).

<!-- syslog
 http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/openlog.html#openlog
 http://stackoverflow.com/questions/8485333/syslog-command-in-c-code
 http://www.linuxquestions.org/questions/programming-9/logging-in-c-on-linux-760009/
-->

### Shell assertion

If you know something should not happen, test it to ensure it.

The `cli-assert` program aborts with an error message if the first and the
second arguments do not match.

Example of a shell code `cli-assert` with assertion.


{{< snippet "examples/cli/sh/cli-assert" >}}


Execution example with assertion for a shell code `cli-assert`.

{{< snippet "examples/cli/sh/cli-assert.log" >}}


### Python assertion

If you know something should not happen, test it to ensure it.

The `cli-assert` program aborts with an error message if the first argument is
not a non-negative value.

Example of a Python code `cli-assert` with assertion.


{{< snippet "examples/cli/python/cli-assert" >}}


Execution example with assertion for a Python code `cli-assert`.

{{< snippet "examples/cli/python/cli-assert.log" >}}


### C assertion

If assertion fails, the C `assert`(3) macro prints an error message to standard
error and terminates the program by calling abort(3).

The `cli-assert.c` program aborts with an error message if the first and only argument is
not a non-negative value.

Example of a C code `cli-assert.c` with assertion.


{{< snippet "examples/cli/c/cli-assert.c" >}}


Compile and execution example with assertion for a C code `cli-assert.c`.

{{< snippet "examples/cli/c/cli-assert.log" >}}


As for "core dumped", please see [ELF: Core dump](/en/2013/08/09/fun2prog-elf/#core-dump).

TIP: Never call an expression with side effects as the argument of the C
`assert`(3) macro if those side effects are essential.  This is because the C
`assert`(3) macro may be disabled by defining the macro `NDEBUG` for the
production code and the argument may never be executed when it is needed.

TIP: [Ian Jackson](http://lists.debian.org/20771.43161.813488.58458@chiark.greenend.org.uk)
said "`-DNDEBUG` is (normally) Evil, Bad and Wrong. ... you shouldn't set it.
Even if upstream specify it it can be right to remove it."

You can completely remove assertion capability in compile time by defining the `NDEBUG` macro.

Compile and execution example without asserion for a C code `cli-assert.c`.

{{< snippet "examples/cli/c/cli-assert-no.log" >}}


<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
