---
title: "Fun to Program -- Hello World!"
date: 2013-08-17T00:00:26+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-hello
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## "Hello World!"

Here are example code snippets to print "Hello World!" and
somethings we should be aware of for each language.

### Shell

The most basic programing language: Shell.

* Interpreter (slow)
* Easy to write a small program.
* Not easy to write a big program.
* Test code snippet under the normal console (or by "`sh -i`").

Source code for the hello shell script


{{< snippet "examples/hello/sh/hello" >}}


Execution of the hello shell script

{{< snippet "examples/hello/sh/hello.log" >}}


TIP: Here, the interactive shell to be Bash and the non-interactive shell to be Dash unless explicitly mentioned.  They are POSIX shell.

### Python

* Interpreter (with fast JIT compiler)
* One of the most versatile language.
* Guide you to write readable program.
* Good for dynamic data.
* Test code snippet under the console provided by "`python3`".

Source code for the hello Python script (simple)


{{< snippet "examples/hello/python/hello-simple" >}}


Python programs are usually written as follows:

Source code for the hello Python script (with `__name__`)


{{< snippet "examples/hello/python/hello-generic" >}}


If you use wish to ensure to use the Python interpreter offered by the Debian
system, the starting line should use as follows.

Source code for the hello Python script (force the Python interpreter offered by the Debian system)


{{< snippet "examples/hello/python/hello" >}}


Execution of the hello Python script

{{< snippet "examples/hello/python/hello.log" >}}


### Lua

* Interpreter
* Small but very versatile.
* Good for embedding into C/C++.
* Good for dynamic data.
* Test code snippet under the console provided by "`lua`".

Source code for the hello Lua script


{{< snippet "examples/hello/lua/hello" >}}


Execution of the hello Lua script

{{< snippet "examples/hello/lua/hello.log" >}}


### Perl

* Interpreter (with fast JIT compiler)
* One of the most versatile language with history.
* Without discipline, you can write mess.
* Good for dynamic data.
* Test code snippet under the console provided by "`perl -d -e 1`".

Source code for the hello Perl script


{{< snippet "examples/hello/perl/hello" >}}


Execution of the hello Perl script

{{< snippet "examples/hello/perl/hello.log" >}}


### C

* Super fast binary (Compiler)
* Very versatile.
* Not so easy for dynamic data without special libraries.
* You need to compile code to test it.
* ABI compatibility issue is less complex.

Source code in C language


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello.c" >}}


Here, I need to include header files:

* "`#include <stdio.h>`" for `printf`.
* "`#include <stdlib.h>`" for `EXIT_SUCCESS`. (`EXIT_SUCCESS = 0`)

Let's compile hello.c to create the ELF object `hello` and run it.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello.log" >}}


Let's list linked libraries to the ELF object `hello`.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/ldd.log" >}}


Here, notable libraries are:

* `linux-vdso.so.1` : Linux Virtual Dynamic Shared Object
* `libc.so.6` : The GNU C Library (glibc)
* `/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2` :  dynamic linker/loader

Let's list symbols defined in the ELF object `hello`.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/nm.log" >}}


Here, symbol types are:

* `A` : value is absolute
* `b` : uninitialized data (local)
* `D` : initialized data (global)
* `d` : initialized data (local)
* `R` : read only data (global)
* `r` : read only data (local)
* `T` : text (code) section (global)
* `t` : text (code) section (local)
* `U` : undefined
* `w` : weak symbol
* `W` : weak symbol

Let's look into how `hello.c` is compiled by stopping before the assembler by creating assembler code as `hello.s` with the `-S` option.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-s.log" >}}


Please note this is written in the AT&T assembler style. We will get back to
its details later.


TIP: Several lines with `.cfi_...` in the assembler code are the [DWARF](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DWARF) CFI directives which help debugger to do backtrace on the modern ABI system without frame pointers (FP). See [CFI support for GNU assembler (GAS)](http://www.logix.cz/michal/devel/gas-cfi/).

### C++

* Super fast binary (Compiler)
* Very versatile.
* Good for dynamic data.
* You need to compile code to test it.
* ABI compatibility issue is more complex.

Source code in C++ language


{{< snippet "examples/hello/cxx/hello.cxx" >}}


Let's compile `hello.cxx` to create the ELF object `hello` and run it.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/cxx/hello.log" >}}


Let's list linked libraries to the ELF object `hello`.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/cxx/ldd.log" >}}


* `linux-vdso.so.1` : Linux Virtual Dynamic Shared Object
* `libstdc++.so.6` : The GNU Standard C++ Library
* `libm.so.6` : The GNU C Library (glibc, support math functions)
* `libgcc_s.so.1` : The runtime library of GCC
* `libc.so.6` : The GNU C Library (glibc)
* `/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2` :  dynamic linker/loader

Let's list symbols defined in the ELF object `hello`.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/cxx/nm.log" >}}


There are many symbols starting with `_Z`.  These are mangled symbols.  We need
to demangle these symbol with `c++filt` to make this readable.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/cxx/nmfilt.log" >}}


Although the source code for both C and C\++ are as simple,
C++ creates more complicated code linked to more libraries
with mangled symbols.

Let's look into how `hello.cxx` is compiled by stopping before the assembler
by creating assembler code with the `-S` option and demangling it
with `c++filt -n`.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/cxx/hello-s.log" >}}


For more on C++ ABI issues, see:

* http://techbase.kde.org/Policies/Binary_Compatibility_Issues_With_C\+\+[Policies/Binary Compatibility Issues With C++]

### Vala

* C#, Java like source code
* Super fast binary (C compiler as its backend, no byte code interpreter)
* Easy support for GLib and GObject.
* Good for dynamic data.
* Automatic memory management.
* You need to compile code to test it.

#### Simple non-OOP style (no class)

Source code `hello-1.vala` in Vala language


{{< snippet "examples/hello/vala/hello-1.vala" >}}


Let's compile `hello-1.vala` to create the ELF object `hello-1` and run it.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/vala/hello-1.log" >}}


You can get the C source as:



{{< snippet "examples/hello/vala/hello-1c.log" >}}


Since no OOP techniques are used, the resulting C code is logically as simple as
the Vala code except for some `#include` directives to pertinent libraries automatically
included for the Vala code.

#### OOP style (main outside of class)

Source code `hello-2.vala` in the Vala language


{{< snippet "examples/hello/vala/hello-2.vala" >}}


TIP: Since the use of `GLib` for the parent class is the default for Vala, the
line of `using GLib;` and the prefix of `GLib.` in the above example may be
dropped as an exception.

Let's compile `hello-2.vala` to create the ELF object `hello-2` and run it.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/vala/hello-2.log" >}}


You can get the C source as:



{{< snippet "examples/hello/vala/hello-2c.log" >}}


It is obvious Vala code is much shorter than C.

The Vala class definition of `Demo.HelloWorld` subclassed from `GLib.Object`
are converted into the C code defining GObject with many macros.  These C code
macros are cliches to use GLib and GObject in C.  The Vala compiler takes care
these chores for you.

* `demo`, `DEMO`, `Demo`: prefix taken from library or application name
* `hello_world`, `HELLO_WORLD`, `HelloWorld`: object type (= class) name
* `demo_hello_world_get_type()`: returning GType of object HELLO_WORLD defined in DEMO

The instantiation of the `obj` object by the Vala `new` expression is converted
into the C `demo_hello_world_new()` function which in turn calls the C
`demo_hello_world_construct()` function.  The dynamic memory management by the
reference counting in the GLib is used to assign memory to the `obj` object.

The Vala also adds a wrapper macro `_g_object_unref0(obj)` to the C code which
is required to free memory properly for the `obj` object.

In general, these macro cliches of GObject are defined as follows:



#define FOO_TYPE_BAR		(foo_bar_get_type ())
#define FOO_BAR(obj)		(G_TYPE_CHECK_INSTANCE_CAST ((obj), \
				FOO_TYPE_BAR, FooBar))
#define FOO_BAR_CLASS(klass)	(G_TYPE_CHECK_CLASS_CAST ((klass),  \
				FOO_TYPE_BAR, FooBarClass))
#define FOO_IS_BAR(obj)		(G_TYPE_CHECK_INSTANCE_TYPE ((obj), \
				FOO_TYPE_BAR))
#define FOO_IS_BAR_CLASS(klass)	(G_TYPE_CHECK_CLASS_TYPE ((klass),  \
				FOO_TYPE_BAR))
#define FOO_BAR_GET_CLASS(obj)	(G_TYPE_INSTANCE_GET_CLASS ((obj),  \
				FOO_TYPE_BAR, FooBarClass))


Here:

* `foo`, `FOO`, `Foo`: prefix taken from library or application name (Optional)
* `bar`, `BAR`, `Bar`: object type (= class) name
* `foo_bar_get_type()`: returning GType of object BAR defined in FOO

#### OOP style (main inside of class)

Source code `hello-3.vala` in the Vala language


{{< snippet "examples/hello/vala/hello-3.vala" >}}


TIP: Since the use of `GLib` for the parent class is the default for Vala, the
line of `using GLib;` and the prefix of `GLib.` in the above example may be
dropped as an exception.

Let's compile `hello-3.vala` to create the ELF object `hello-3` and run it.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/vala/hello-3.log" >}}


You can get the C source as:



{{< snippet "examples/hello/vala/hello-3c.log" >}}


It is obvious Vala code is much shorter than C.  Many CPP macros are defined
here, too.  These are cliches to use GLib and GObject in C.  The Vala compiler takes care
these chores for you.

* `demo`, `DEMO`, `Demo`: prefix taken from library or application name
* `hello_world`, `HELLO_WORLD`, `HelloWorld`: object type (= class) name
* `demo_hello_world_get_type()`: returning GType of object HELLO_WORLD defined in DEMO


<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
