---
title: "Fun to Program -- GCC"
date: 2013-08-17T00:00:31+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-gcc
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## GCC

The `gccintro` package provides a good tutorial "Introduction to GCC by Brian
J. Gough" for the GCC basics to compile C programs.

### GCC version

Check gcc version and defaults:


{{< snippet "examples/gcc/gcc-version.log" >}}


### Basic options

Basic GCC syntax from the top few lines of its manpage:


```
gcc [-c|-S|-E] [-std=standard]
    [-g] [-pg] [-Olevel]
    [-Wwarn...] [-pedantic]
    [-Idir...] [-Ldir...]
    [-Dmacro[=defn]...] [-Umacro]
    [-foption...] [-mmachine-option...]
    [-o outfile] [@file] infile...
```

The manpage for gcc is too long.  Here are the part I should remember.

* `-c` :        preprocess=Yes compile=Yes assemble=Yes link=No
* `-S` :        preprocess=Yes compile=Yes assemble=No  link=No
* `-E` :        preprocess=Yes compile=No  assemble=No  link=No
* `-std=standard` : specify standard conformance
    * C   : `-ansi` is `-std=c89` , default is `-std=gnu89`
    * C++ : `-ansi` is `-std=c++98` , default is `-std=gnu++98`
* `-Wall` :     enables all the warnings.
* `-pedantic` : warnings by strict ISO C and ISO C++ conformance
* `-g`    :     produce debug information for `gdb`(1)
* `-pg`   :     produce extra code for `gprof`(1)
* `-O0`   :     no optimization
* `-O1`   :     some optimization
* `-O2`   :     lots of optimization
* `-O3`   :     yet more optimization
* `-I<dir>`     : search the <dir> directory for header files
* `-L<dir>`     : search the <dir> directory for library files
* `-l<library>` : search the <library> library when linking
* `-D<macro>[=<defn>]` : predefine the <macro> macro (<defn> or 1)
* `-U<macro>`        : undefine the <macro> macro
* `-f<option>`  : set the <option> machine-independent flag
* `-m<machine-option>` : set the <machine-option> machine-dependent flag
* `-o<outfile>` :  output in the <outfile> file
* `@<file>` : read command-line options from <file>.
* `-v`         verbose output. (list defined symbols etc.)
* `-Q`         compiler print out each function name etc.
* `-Wp,<option>` : pass option as an <option> directly to the preprocessor.
* `-Wa,<option>` : pass option as an <option> directly to the assembler.
* `-Wl,<option>` : pass option as an <option> directly to the linker.
* `-fpic`        : generate position-independent code (smaller code)
* `-fPIC`        : generate position-independent code (larger code)
* `-fpie`        : generated code for position independent executable (smaller code)
* `-fPIE`        : generated code for position independent executable (larger code)
* `-pie`         : generated position independent executable (smaller code, linker option)
* `-PIE`         : generated position independent executable (larger code, linker option)

Please note that `gcc` uses no space after the command switch and a single leading `-` even for long option.

The current C defualt is `-std=gnu90` which is GNU dialect of ISO C90 including some C99 features.

The current C\++ defualt is `-std=gnu++98` which is GNU dialect of 1998 ISO C\++ standard plus amendments including some C++11 features.

TIP: The meaning of `inline` in C is different between the default `-std=gnu90` and the rest of the world (`-std=gnu99|-std=c99|...`).  See [An Inline Function is As Fast As a Macro](http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Inline.html).

### Assembler code

The GCC with the `-S` option produces the assembler code output written in the
AT&T assembler style as shown in the "Hello World!" example.

It is not so difficult to grock roghly what the GCC generated assembler code
does.  (Writing some code in the assembler from scratch requires serious
knowledge.)

Some basic register names, command mnemonic names, and command mnemonic suffix
conventions need to be noted.

* Command mnemonic names and quasi-C equivalents:
    * "`mov op1, op2`" : "`op2 = op1`"
    * "`mov (op1), op2`" : "`op2 = *op1`"
    * "`lea (op1), op2`" : "`op2 = op1`" (load effective address)
    * "`add op1, op2`" : "`op2 += op1`"
    * "`sub op1, op2`" : "`op2 -= op1`"
    * "`test op1, op2`" : set flags based on "`op2 & op1`"
    * "`cmp op1, op2`" : set flags based on "`op2 - op1`"
    * "`call op1`" : call function at `op1`
    ** Push the next instruction address `%rip + 2` to the stack and jump to the `op1` address
    * "`ret`" : return to the callee procedure
    ** Pop the next instruction address `%rip` from the stack.
    * "`jmp op`" : jump unconditional to `op`
    * "`je op`" : jump equal to to `op`
    * "`jne op`" : jump not-equal to `op`
    * "`jg op`" : jump greater to `op`
    * "`jge op`" : jump greater-or-equal to `op`
    * "`jl op`" : jump less to `op`
    * "`jle op`" : jump less-or-equal to `op`
    * "`jz op`" : jump zero to `op`
    * "`jnz op`" : jump non-zero to `op`
* Command mnemonic suffix indicating data width:
    * "`b`" : 8 bit (byte)
    * "`w`" : 16 bit (word)
    * "`l`" : 32 bit (long)
    * "`q`" : 64 bit (quadruple word)
* Command mnemonic arguments:
    * "`$`" : immediate value following
    * "`Offs(Base,Index,Scale)`" : the value stored at the address `Base + Index * Scale + Offs` (where, `Scale` = 1, 2, 4, 8).
* Register names and their data width:
    * 64 bit: `%rax`, `%rbx`, `%rcx`, `%rdx`, `%rdi`, `%rsi`, `%rbp`, `%rsp`, ...
    * 32 bit: `%eax`, `%ebx`, `%ecx`, `%edx`, `%edi`, `%esi`, `%ebp`, `%esp`, ...

TIP: "`mov op1, op2`" moves data "`op1` -> `op2`" in the AT&T assembler style
(GCC default); while "`mov op1, op2`" moves data "`op1` <- `op2`" in the Intel
assembler style (NASM default).  These are in the opposite order.

Examples of assembly codes

|AT&T                              |Intel                      | quasi-C                 |
|----------------------------------|---------------------------|--------------------------------|
|`movq $0x12345678, %rax`          |`mov rax, 12345678h`       | `rax = 0x12345678` |
|`movq $0xff, %rax`                |`mov rax, 0ffh`            | `rax = 0xff` |
|`movq -8(%rbp), %rax`             |`mov rax, [rbp-8]`         | `rax = *(rbp - 8)` |
|`movq -0x10(%rbp, %rdx, 8), %rax` |`mov rax, [rbp+rdx*8-10h]` | `rax = *(rbp + rdx * 8 - 0x10)` |
|`movq (%rcx), %rax`               |`mov rax, [rcx]`           | `rax = *(rcx)` |
|`movq %rcx, %rax`                 |`mov rax, rcx`             | `rax = rcx` |
|`leaq 8(,%rcx,8), %rax`           |`lea rax, [rcx*8+8]`       | `rax = rcx * 8 + 8` |
|`leaq (%rbx,%rcx,4), %rax`        |`lea rax, [rbx+rcx*4]`     | `rax = rbx + rcx * 4` |

Some basic 64-bit (= 8 bytes) integer ABI conventions under the `x86-64` (`amd64`) Linux need to be noted.

* registers for function call return values
    * "`%rax`" : the 1st function return integer value (a.k.a. accumulator register)
    * "`%rdx`" : the 2nd function return integer value (a.k.a. data register)
    * "`%xmm0`" : the 1st function return double precision floating point value (128-bit [SSE2](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SSE2) register)
    * "`%xmm1`" : the 2nd function return double precision floating point value (128-bit [SSE2](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SSE2) register)
* registers for managing the stack
    * "`%rsp`" : the stack pointer to the top of the stack. (`%rsp` a.k.a. stack pointer register)
    * "`%rbp`" : the frame pointing to the base of the stack frame. (`%rbp` a.k.a. stack base pointer register)
* temporary registers
    * "`%r10`", "`%r11`", "`%xmm8`" - "`%xmm15`"
* callee-saved registers
    * "`%rbx`", "`%r12`" - "`%r15`"
* registers to pass function arguments
    * "`%rdi`" : the 1st function argument integer passed (a.k.a. destination index register)
    * "`%rsi`" : the 2nd function argument integer passed (a.k.a. source index register)
    * "`%rdx`" : the 3rd function argument integer passed (a.k.a. data register)
    * "`%rcx`" : the 4th function argument integer passed (a.k.a. counter register)
    * "`%r8`"  : the 5th function argument integer passed
    * "`%r9`"  : the 6th function argument integer passed
    * "`%xmm2`" - "`%xmm7`" : the function argument floating point passed
* stack data usages (the stack grows from the high address to the low address)
    * stack "`*(%rbp + 8*(n-5))`" : the last (n-th) function argument passed
    * ...
    * stack "`*(%rbp + 16)`" : the 7th function argument passed
    * stack "`*(%rbp + 8)`" : the function return address
    * stack "`*(%rbp)`" : the old `%rbp` value (`%rbp`: frame pointer)
    * stack "`*(%rbp - 8)`" : the 1st local variable
    * stack "`*(%rbp - 16)`" : the 2nd local variable
    * stack "`*(%rbp - 24)`" : the 3rd local variable
    * ...
    * stack "`*(%rsp)`"  : the top local variable (`%rsp`: stack pointer)

There are some memory alignment requirements of x86-64 under GCC/Linux.

* 8-byte aligned: long, double, pointer
* 16-byte aligned: SSE2 instructions, long double

TIP: These register usages and function call conventions are architecture and
OS specific.  For example, i386 passes all function arguments in the stack by
pushing them in the right-to-left order.

TIP: There are some strange situation on `fdivp` and `fdivrp`:
[Debian Bug #372528: as/i386: reverses fdivp and fdivrp](http://bugs.debian.org/372528)

### String in C function

This tricky problem of string in C function becomes simple when you inspect
the code under the assembler.

Here is a C code `string-array.c` which manipulates a string.

string-array.c with "char[]"


{{< snippet "examples/gcc/string-array.c" >}}


This `string-array.c` compiles fine and runs without problem.

Compile and run of string-array.c

{{< snippet "examples/gcc/string-array.log" >}}


Here is a similar looking buggy C code `string-pointer.c`.

string-pointer.c with "char *"


{{< snippet "examples/gcc/string-pointer.c" >}}


This `string-pointer.c` compiles fine but fails to run.

Compile and run of string-pointer.c

{{< snippet "examples/gcc/string-pointer.log" >}}


This reason can be elucidated by looking into their assembler codes by
compiling with the `-S` option.

Assembler code from string-array.c


{{< snippet "examples/gcc/string-arrayS.log" >}}


Here, upon execution of main function, the stack space for storing `data[]` is
dynamically secured and the value of "`abcdefgh`" is stored into the stack
space by the somewhat obfuscated assignment operation as below:


```
        movl    $1684234849, -16(%rbp)
        movl    $1751606885, -12(%rbp)
```

* local data: low address = address pointed by `%rbp` with offset -16
    * 1684234849 = 0x64636261
    * ,, = `'d'` * 0x1000000 + `'c'` * 0x10000 + `'b'` * 0x100 + `'a'`
* local data: high address = address pointed by `%rbp` with offset -12
    * 1751606885 = 0x68676665
    * ,, = `'h'` * 0x1000000 + `'g'` * 0x10000 + `'f'` * 0x100 + `'e'`

Please note x86-64 (=amd64) is little endian architecture (LSB first memory mapping) thus `'a'` = 0x61 comes first in the stack.

Assembler code from string-pointer.c


{{< snippet "examples/gcc/string-pointerS.log" >}}


Here, the value of "`abcdefgh`" is stored in the section marked as `.rodata`,
i.e., read-only.  So the `./string-pointer` command tries to overwrite this
read-only data and causes segmentation error.

This execution time error can be moved to compilation time error by adding
"`const`" to the line defining the string.

Compile error for string-const-pointer.c with "const char *"


{{< snippet "examples/gcc/string-const-pointer.c" >}}


This `string-const-pointer.c` fails to compile.

Compile error of string-const-pointer.c

{{< snippet "examples/gcc/string-const-pointer.log" >}}


### Buffer overflow protection

Enabling macro `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` with `-D` option substitutes high risk
functions in the GNU `libc` library to protect against the buffer overflow
risk.  This requires `gcc` to be run with `-O1` or higher optimization.  This
works on all CPU architectures as long as the source code is linked to the GNU
`libc` library.

* `-D_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2 -O2`

GCC's Stack Smashing Protector (SSP) to protect against the buffer overflow
risk of unknown cause was developed by IBM and originally called ProPolice.
This only works on some CPU architectures.  SSP can be enabled by the GCC flag:

* SSP on for all: `-fstack-protector-all`
* SSP on: `-fstack-protector`
* SSP off: `-fno-stack-protector`

Let's try these compiler options using an example `bof.c` code having the buffer overflow risk.

bof.c with the buffer overflow risk:


{{< snippet "examples/gcc/bof.c" >}}


Buffer overflow protection: None

{{< snippet "examples/gcc/bof-unsafe.log" >}}


Buffer overflow protection: `-D_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2`

{{< snippet "examples/gcc/bof-fortify.log" >}}


Buffer overflow protection: `-fstack-protector --param=ssp-buffer-size=4`

{{< snippet "examples/gcc/bof-safe.log" >}}


Buffer overflow protection: `-fstack-protector-all`

{{< snippet "examples/gcc/bof-safest.log" >}}


* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buffer_overflow_protection
* [GCC extension for protecting applications from stack-smashing attacks](http://www.research.ibm.com/trl/projects/security/ssp/) (IBM Research, August 22, 2005)
* http://www.ipa.go.jp/security/awareness/vendor/programmingv2/contents/c904.html (Japanese: Part of secure programing course by IPA, Japanese government funded.)
* "Introduction to GCC by Brian J. Gough" in the [gccintro](http://packages.qa.debian.org/g/gccintro.html) package.


<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
