---
title: "Fun to Program -- Code examples"
date: 2013-08-17T00:00:51+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-code-examples
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## Code examples

Here are code examples which I thought interesting.

### Encrypted code

Let's make an obfuscated shell code by encrypting its real code contents.
The following creates an encrypted ASCII file `hello.asc` (passphrase used was
"secret") from `hello`.

Encrypting `hello` shell script into `hello.asc`


{{< snippet "examples/ideas/sh/gpg.txt" >}}


Let's add decrypting shell code to this `hello.asc` to make an obfuscated
Shell `hello-secret` as follows.

Obfuscated Shell `hello-secret`

{{< snippet "examples/ideas/sh/hello-secret" >}}


This script can be executed if you know the secret passphrase as follows.

Executing `hello-secret` while providing the passphrase

{{< snippet "examples/ideas/sh/hello-secret.txt" >}}


### Check modification

The identity verification of a file can be simplified by using
[cryptographic hash function](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_hash_function)
such as:

 * [SHA-1](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-1)
 * [MD5](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MD5)
 * ...

Sometimes, you wish to check non-malicious user modifications to a
configuration file from the configuration helper script.  Here is a very light
weight check method without GPG signature which I deployed for the im-config
package.

An example of configuration file `test.conf`

{{< snippet "examples/ideas/hush/test.conf.in" >}}


You can add a signature generated by the MD5 cryptographic hash function to
this configuration file `test.conf`.

Add the MD5 hush value


{{< snippet "examples/ideas/hush/md5add.log" >}}


Let's verify that this has not been inadvertently modified by users with the
MD5 hush value.

Check the MD5 hush value before modification


{{< snippet "examples/ideas/hush/md5chk.log" >}}


Let's make a modification to `test.conf` and check with the same method.

Check the MD5 hush value after modification


{{< snippet "examples/ideas/hush/md5mod.log" >}}


This method is only good for detecting non-malicious user modifications.


<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
