---
title: "Fun to Program -- Debug: level 2"
date: 2013-08-11T00:00:35+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-debug-2
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## Debug: level 2

Tracing program execution to understand the general behavior of the program is
the major part of debugging.

There are several ways to trace programs non-interactively without any modifications to the source.

### strace

This is very effective tools to investigate what a program does without
reading its full source at the system calll level.

Let's investigate how the `hello-gdb` ELF binary
(see [ELF: Compile hello-gdb]({{< ref "fun2-00009.md" >}}#compile-hello-gdb)) is executed.

The trace of the system call is obtained with `strace`.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-strace.log" >}}


This can get too big to read.

The statistics of the system call is obtained with `strace -c` to get the big picture.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-strace-c.log" >}}


Now you know which system calls to trace, use `strace -e trace=...`.  For
example what files are accessed can be done just tracing `open`.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-strace-e.log" >}}


### ltrace

This is very effective tools to investigate what a program does without
reading its full source at the library call level.

Let's investigate how the `hello-gdb` ELF binary
(see [ELF: Compile hello-gdb]({{< ref "fun2-00009.md" >}}#compile-hello-gdb)) is executed from a different angle.

The trace of the library call is obtained with `ltrace`.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-ltrace.log" >}}


The statistics of the library call is obtained with `ltrace -c`.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-ltrace-c.log" >}}


But the use of `ltrace` slows down program execution significantly for some
case.  Use it carefully.

Here are some similar tracing programs.

* `xtrace` package: trace communication between X client and server
* `latrace` package: traces library calls in dynamically linked programs with LD_AUDIT feature


<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
