---
title: "Fun to Program -- ELF"
date: 2013-08-09T00:00:33+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-elf
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## ELF

In this chapter, I will play with
[ELF](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executable_and_Linkable_Format) files
generated from the same `hello.c` program file as the one in the
[Hello World: C]({{< ref "fun2-00002.md" >}}#c) with the debug information to learn how it works.

See the following for the he [ELF](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executable_and_Linkable_Format):

* The wikipedia: [ELF](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executable_and_Linkable_Format)
* The man page `elf`(5).
* [Linkers and Loaders](http://www.iecc.com/linker/) (draft) for their mechanism.
* [Understanding Memory](http://www.ualberta.ca/CNS/RESEARCH/LinuxClusters/mem.html) for mechanism of the memory system on Linux.
* [Executable and Linkable Format (ELF)](http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~charngda/elf.html)
* [GNU Binutils and BFD](http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~charngda/bfd.html)

An ELF file has two views:

* The section header lists the set of sections of the binary. (`readelf -S`)
* The program header shows the segments used at run-time. (`readelf -l`)

TIP: Both `readelf` and `objdump` offer similar functions.  The `readelf`
command exists independently of the BFD library, so if there is a bug in the
BFD `objdump` command then `readelf` will not be affected.  Only the `objdump`
command can do disassemble.

### Compile hello-gdb

Let's compile the `hello.c` program file into the
[ELF](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executable_and_Linkable_Format) executable
`hello-gdb` with the additional flags.

* `-g` flag produces debugging information in the operating system's native format ([DWARF](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DWARF) on GNU/Linux).
* `-v` flag produces verbose output of the commands executed to run the stages of compilation.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb.log" >}}


Here the `gcc` command steps through 3 stages of compilation with 3 sub-commands:

* `/usr/lib/gcc/x86_64-linux-gnu/4.7/cc1` which is roughly the `gcc -S` command (Compiler from the C code to the assembler code).
* `as` which is the assembler. (The `gcc -c` stops after this.)
* `/usr/lib/gcc/x86_64-linux-gnu/4.7/collect2` which is roughly equivalent of the good old `ld` (linker).

FYI:


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/collect2.log" >}}


In order to understand how linker works to create an executable from an object file, let me make the `hello.o` and `hello-gdb.o` ELF object files with the `gcc -c` command.


{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdbo.log" >}}


So including the `hello` file generated in [Hello World: C]({{< ref "fun2-00002.md" >}}#c), we have 4 ELF files to play with.

Summary of options and generated output files from `hello.c`.

|  *option* |  *output* file | *content* |
| -------- | ---- | ---- |
| ***NONE***  | `hello` | executable file |
| `-g` | `hello-gdb` | executable file with debug symbol |
| `-c` | `hello.o` |  object file |
| `-c -g` | `hello-gdb.o` | object file with debug symbol |


### size

Here is the size of the ELF files.

Size of the ELF file generated from `hello.c`.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-size.log" >}}


The GNU `size` command lists the section sizes -- and the total size -- for each of the object or archive files in its argument list.

* The `text` column is the size of the executable instructions of a program in the decimal expression.
* The `data` column is the size of the initialized data that contribute to the program's memory image in the decimal expression.
* The `bss` column is the size of the uninitialized data that contributes to the program's memory image in the decimal expression.
* The `dec` column is the total size of the `text`, `data`, and `bss` sections in the decimal expression.
* The `hex` column is the total size of the `text`, `data`, and `bss` sections in the hexadecimal expression.

Since the difference between `hello` and `hello-gdb` is the debug information, they share the same values with `size`(1) but their file size is different with `ls`(1).

The `text` column of `hello-gdb` is much larger than that of `hello-gdb.o` since the linker seems to link few additional object files such as `crt1.o`, `crti.o`, etc.

These will be elucidated from the following results.

### readelf --file-header

Here are the ELF file header of the `hello` file.

ELF file Header of the `hello` file.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-readelf-h.log" >}}


TIP: `-h` = `--file-header`

Let's compare the ELF file headers of the compiled `hello.c`.

ELF file headers of the compiled `hello.c`

<!-- table "examples/hello/bench/elf-header.txt" -->


|Item |`hello.o` |`hello-gdb.o` |`hello` |`hello-gdb` |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|Magic |7f 45 4c 46 02 01 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 | ← | ← | ←  |
|Class |ELF64 |  ← | ← | ← |
|Data |2's complement, little endian | ← | ← | ← |
|Version (EI_VERSION) |1 (current) | ← | ← | ← |
|OS/ABI |UNIX - System V |  ← | ← | ← |
|ABI Version |0 | ← | ← | ← |
|Type |REL (Relocatable file) | ← |EXEC (Executable file) | ← |
|Machine |Advanced Micro Devices X86-64 | ← | ← | ← |
|Version (e_version) |0x1 |0x1 |0x1 |0x1 |
|Entry point address |0x0 |0x0 |0x400410 |0x400410 |
|Start of program headers (bytes into file) |0 |0 |64 |64 |
|Start of section headers (bytes into file) |288 |944 |2640 |3232 |
|Flags |0x0 |0x0 |0x0 |0x0 |
|Size of this header (bytes) |64 |64 |64 |64 |
|Size of program headers (bytes) |0 |0 |56 |56 |
|Number of program headers |0 |0 |8 |8 |
|Size of section headers (bytes) |64 |64 |64 |64 |
|Number of section headers |13 |21 |30 |35 |
|Section header string table index |10 |18 |27 |32 |

### readelf --sections

The section header lists the set of sections of the binary.

Here are the sections in these ELF files.

Sections of the `hello-gdb` file.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-readelf-S.log" >}}


TIP: `-S` = `--sections` = `--section-headers`

Let's compare the ELF file sections of the compiled `hello.c`.

ELF file sections of the compiled `hello.c`

<!-- "examples/hello/bench/elf-section.txt" -->

|section |type |`hello.o` | `hello-gdb.o` |`hello` | `hello-gdb` | `size` |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| |NULL |0 |0 |0 |0 | |
|.interp |PROGBITS |N/A |N/A |0x1c |0x1c |text |
|.note.ABI-tag |NOTE |N/A |N/A |0x20 |0x20 |text |
|.note.gnu.build-i |NOTE |N/A |N/A |0x24 |0x24 |text |
|.dynsym |DYNSYM |N/A |N/A |0x60 |0x60 |text |
|.dynstr |STRTAB |N/A |N/A |0x3d |0x3d |text |
|.gnu.hash |GNU_HASH |N/A |N/A |0x1c |0x1c |text |
|.gnu.version |VERSYM |N/A |N/A |0x8 |0x8 |text |
|.gnu.version_r |VERNEED |N/A |N/A |0x20 |0x20 |text |
|.rela.dyn |RELA |N/A |N/A |0x18 |0x18 |text |
|.rela.plt |RELA |N/A |N/A |0x48 |0x48 |text |
|.init |PROGBITS |N/A |N/A |0x1a |0x1a |text |
|.plt |PROGBITS |N/A |N/A |0x40 |0x40 |text |
|.text |PROGBITS |0x15 |0x15 |0x1a2 |0x1a2 |text |
|.fini |PROGBITS |N/A |N/A |0x9 |0x9 |text |
|.rodata |PROGBITS |0xe |0xe |0x12 |0x12 |text |
|.eh_frame |PROGBITS |0x38 |0x38 |0xd4 |0xd4 |text |
|.eh_frame_hdr |PROGBITS |N/A |N/A |0x34 |0x34 |text |
|.dynamic |DYNAMIC |N/A |N/A |0x1d0 |0x1d0 |data |
|.got |PROGBITS |N/A |N/A |0x8 |0x8 |data |
|.got.plt |PROGBITS |N/A |N/A |0x30 |0x30 |data |
|.data |PROGBITS |0 |0 |0x10 |0x10 |data |
|.jcr |PROGBITS |N/A |N/A |0x8 |0x8 |data |
|.fini_array |FINI_ARRAY |N/A |N/A |0x8 |0x8 |data |
|.init_array |INIT_ARRAY |N/A |N/A |0x8 |0x8 |data |
|.bss |NOBITS |0 |0 |0x8 |0x8 |bss |
|.comment |PROGBITS |0x1d |0x1d |0x38 |0x38 |??? |
|.debug_info |PROGBITS |N/A |0x9f |N/A |0x9f |??? |
|.debug_abbrev |PROGBITS |N/A |0x42 |N/A |0x42 |??? |
|.debug_aranges |PROGBITS |N/A |0x30 |N/A |0x30 |??? |
|.debug_line |PROGBITS |N/A |0x3c |N/A |0x3c |??? |
|.debug_str |PROGBITS |N/A |0xf5 |N/A |0xbc |??? |
|.symtab |SYMTAB |0x108 |0x180 |0x618 |0x690 |??? |
|.strtab |STRTAB |0x13 |0x13 |0x237 |0x237 |??? |
|.shstrtab |STRTAB |0x61 |0xb0 |0x108 |0x148 |??? |


Here, N/A stands for "not available".

Let's compare the `.text` size reported by `size` and `readelf -S`.

Comparison of the reported size.

| *file*    | *size*                | *readelf* |
|  ---      | --------------------  | ---------------- |
| `hello.o` | *text* = 91 = 0x5b    | *.text* + *.rodata* + *.eh_frame* = 0x5b |
| `hello`   | *text* = 1350 = 0x546 | all marked `text` in `size` column = 0x53b = 1339 (11 bytes mismatch) |
| `hello`   | *data* = 568 = 0x238  | *.dynamic* + *.got* + *.got.plt* + *.data* + *.jcr* + *.fini_array* + *.init.array* = 0x238 |
| `hello`   | *bss*  = 4   = 0x4    | *.bss*  = 0x4 |

FIXME: Why different?

Here you see some additional sections marked as `.debug_*` exist since you compiled the `hello-gdb.o` and `hello-gdb` files with the `-g` option.  The `hello.o` and `hello` files do not have these debug sections.

Various sections are described in the man page `elf`(5) after "Various sections hold program and control information:".

TIP: The `objdump -h` outputs very similar results.

### readelf --segments

The program header shows the segments used at run-time.  So this is only available for the ELF executable files.

Here are the program headers (=segments) in these ELF files.

Program headers of the `hello` file.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-readelf-l.log" >}}


<!--
 .Segment headers of the `hello-gdb` file.
 ----
 include::hello/c/hello-gdb-readelf-l.log[]
 ----
-->

Segment headers of the `hello-gdb` file is the same as that of the `hello` file.

TIP: `-l` = `--segments` = `--program-headers`

Various sections are described mostly in the man page `elf`(5) under `p_type`.

* `PHDR` is for the program header table.
* `INTERP` is for the interpreter path ASCIIZ string for starting the executable file.
* `LOAD` is for the loadable segment. (may be repeated)
* `DYNAMIC` is for the dynamic linking information.
* `NOTE` is for auxiliary information.
* `GNU_EH_FRAME` is for exception handling. (DWARF, see [LSB Exception Frames](http://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/LSB_3.0.0/LSB-Core-generic/LSB-Core-generic/ehframechpt.html))
* `GNU_STACK` is for the controling the stack on Linux. (GNU extension)

TIP: The `objdump -p` outputs somewhat similar results.

### hexdump

Here is a plain hexadecimal dump of the entire `hello-gdb` file.  (some parts trimmed)

Hexdump of the `hello-gdb` file.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-hd.log" >}}


Here is a nicer hexadecimal dump with all sections clearly marked by the `objdump` command for the `hello-gdb` ELF object.

Hexadecimal dump for all sections of the `hello-gdb` ELF object.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-objdump-s.log" >}}


Here is another hexadecimal dump for a section by the `readelf` command for the `hello-gdb` ELF object.

Hexadecimal dump for the `.text` section of the `hello-gdb` ELF object.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-readelf-xtext.log" >}}


As expected, these are all almost incomprehensible for human.

The `readelf` and `objdump` commands display the correct
[virtual memory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_memory) address for the ELF
object after this is loaded to the memory.  The base address to load this is at
0x400000 (4 MiB) for GNU/Linux(amd64 = X86-64).  The above plain hexadecimal
dump displays the physical address in the file and does not count this base
address offset in the
[virtual memory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_memory).

### readelf -a

Here are all non-debug contents by the `readelf` command of the `hello-gdb` ELF object.

All contents by the `readelf` command for the `hello-gdb` ELF object.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-readelf-a.log" >}}


The ELF file data structure is clearly analyzed excluding the debug contents.

The code content of the program is not disassembled.

### readelf -wL

The `readelf -wL` command lists the decoded dump of debug contents of section `.debug_line`.

It lists the source file name with path.  Then each C source line nember is matched with its starting address.

For the `hello-gdb` ELF object, the `readelf -wL` command lists the C source line numbers as follows.

All the source line numbers listed by the `readelf -wL` command for the `hello-gdb` ELF object.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-readelf-wL.log" >}}


TIP: The `objdump -WL` outputs very similar results. (The upper case W!)

TIP: All debug contents can be displayed at once by the `readelf -w` (or `objdump -W`) command.

### objdump -d

Here is a disassembled code dump by the `objdump` command for the `hello-gdb.o` ELF object.

Disassembled code dump by the `objdump` command for the `hello-gdb.o` ELF object.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdbo-objdump-d.log" >}}


Now we see the binary code in the readable assembler format.

Since code is not linked, some address data are left as 0 which will be filled by the linker.

Here is a disassembled code dump by the `objdump` command for the `hello-gdb` ELF object.

Disassembled code dump by the `objdump` command for the `hello-gdb` ELF object.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdb-objdump-d.log" >}}


Now we see the binary code in the readable assembler format.

You also see many codes in addition to the `main` function existed in the `hello-gdb.o` ELF object since the linker seems to link few additional object files such as `crt1.o`, `crti.o`, etc.

Also some unresolved address references in the `hello-gdb.o` ELF object is resolved.

For example, let's trace `call puts` in the assembler source `hello.s` as follows.

Code to `call puts` in the `hello.s`. (No address resolution)
```
    call    puts
```

We see the following for the relocatable object `hello-gdb.o`.

Code to `call puts` in the `hello-gdb.o`. (No address resolution)
```
     9:    e8 00 00 00 00           callq  e <main+0xe>
```

We see the following for the executable `hello-gdb`.

Code to `call puts` in the `hello-gdb`. (Address resolved)
```
4005b5:    e8 d6 fe ff ff           callq  400490 <puts@plt>
```

Later we will see the following under GDB.

Code to `call puts` in the `hello-gdb` viewed from `(gdb) disassembler/r main`. (Address resolved)
```
0x00000000004005b5 <+9>:	e8 d6 fe ff ff	callq  0x400490 <puts@plt>
```

### objdump -S

Here is a disassembled code dump by the `objdump` command for the `hello-gdb.o` ELF object with the original C source code.

Disassembled code dump by the `objdump` command for the `hello-gdb.o` ELF object with the original C source code.

{{< snippet "examples/hello/c/hello-gdbo-objdump-S.log" >}}


The ELF file only contains the location of the original C source code and correspondence to lines in it.

Since code is not linked, some address data are left as 0 which will be filled by the linker.

If you run `objdump -S hello-gdb`, you get a long disassembled list with the original C source code.  Its addresses are resolved.

### Core dump

When a user-process crashes, traditional Unix-like systems create a `core` file
in the current directory if it is enabled.  This is called
[core dump](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Core_dump) file which records the state
of the working memory of the crashed user-process program.  It is stored in the
ELF file format on Linux.

In order to enable the creation of this `core` file, you need to set the core
file size to `unlimited` with the shell's `ulimit -c unlimited` command in
advance.

Set the core file size to `unlimited` with `ulimit -c unlimited`.

```
$ ulimit -c
0
$ ulimit -c unlimited
$ ulimit -c
unlimited
```

Modern Linux system may behave somewhat differently.  In order to achieve this
simple classical core dump behavior, please ensure the following.

* Purge packages such as `apport-gtk` and `apport`.
* The `/proc/sys/kernel/core_pattern` file contains `core`.
* The `/proc/sys/kernel/core_uses_pid` file contains `0`.

Please read the `core`(5) manpage and the `ulimit` section in the `bash`(1)
manpage for more.

You can use GDB to inspect the `core` file as [Debug: level 3: gdb prime8-gdb]({{< ref "fun2-00012.md" >}}#gdb-prime8-gdb).

<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
