---
title: "Fun to Program -- Library"
date: 2013-08-08T00:00:32+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-library
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## Library

### Static and dynamic libraries

Compiling source while stopping at object file can be done with the `-c` option.
You can bunch such object files into a single archive/object.  This is called library.

* static library: `libfoo.a`
    * simple archive of object files (`*.o`) as "`ar rcs libfoo.a *.o`"
    * *.a may be used just like bunch of `*.o` files while linking.
* dynamic library: `libfoo.so`
    * all object files (`*.o`) compiled with `gcc` option `-fPIC`.
    * shared object file created by "`gcc -shared -Wl,-soname,libfoo.so.1 -o libfoo.so.1.0 *.o`".
    * associated symbolic links created by "`ldconfig`".

TIP: In order to load a library file with the GCC `-l` option, its name must
start with `lib`.

I do not go in details here but the `gccintro` package provides a good tutorial
"Introduction to GCC by Brian J. Gough" with examples.

See also:

* [How To Write Shared Libraries](http://people.redhat.com/drepper/dsohowto.pdf) by Ulrich Drepper (2011-12-10)
* [Good Practices in Library Design, Implementation, and Maintenance](http://people.redhat.com/drepper/goodpractice.pdf) by Ulrich Drepper (2002-03-07)
* [ELF Symbol Versioning](http://people.redhat.com/drepper/symbol-versioning) by Ulrich Drepper
* [Shared Library Search Paths](http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/notes/rpath.html) by Russ Allbery (2011-11-11)
* [RPATH issue](http://wiki.debian.org/RpathIssue) (wiki.debian.org)
* Dynamic Linking in Linux and Windows [part one](http://www.symantec.com/connect/articles/dynamic-linking-linux-and-windows-part-one) and [part two](http://www.symantec.com/connect/articles/dynamic-linking-linux-and-windows-part-two) by Reji Thomas and Bhasker Reddy (2010-11-02)
* [Library Interface Versioning in Solaris and Linux](http://static.usenix.org/publications/library/proceedings/als00/2000papers/papers/full_papers/browndavid/browndavid_html/) by David J. Brown and Karl Runge (October 2010-10-10)
* [Learn Linux, 101: Manage shared libraries](http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/linux/library/l-lpic1-v3-102-3/) by Ian Shields (IBM DW, Date: 31 Aug 2011)
* [Practice: Manage shared libraries](http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/linux/library/l-setup-sharedlibs-pr/) by Tracy Bost (IBM DW, Date: 21 Jun 2011)
* [Anatomy of Linux dynamic libraries](http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/linux/library/l-dynamic-libraries/) by M. Tim Jones (IBM DW, Date:  20 Aug 2008)
* [Use shared objects on Linux](http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/linux/library/l-shared/) by Sachin Agrawal (IBM DW, Date:  11 May 2004)
* [Program Library HOWTO](http://tldp.org/HOWTO/Program-Library-HOWTO/) by David A. Wheeler (TLDP, 11 April 2003)
* [Shared objects for the object disoriented!](http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/library/l-shobj/) by Ashish Bansal (IBM DW, Date:  01 Apr 2001)

### GNU C Library

The Debian `libc6:amd64` package offeres
[embedded GNU C library](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embedded_GLIBC) which
contains the standard libraries that are used by nearly all programs on the
system.

Shared libraries offered by the `libc6:amd64` package.

{{< snippet "examples/lib/libc/libc.log" >}}


### libc

Most of the standard C library functions are included in the `libc` library.

You do not mention linking to the `libc` library explicitly using the `-l` option to GCC.  It is always linked.

Most of the basic functions of the `libc` library are explained in many C
programing tutorials such as "The C programming Language, by B. W. Kerninghan
and Dennis M. Ritchie".  I will skip most of those mentioned in such tutorials.

[The GNU C Library](http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/) manual is also good source of information.

### libc: macro

There are some macros defined in the `libc` library.  They tend to make
programs easier to read.

Macro for exit status.

{{< snippet "examples/lib/libc/EXIT.log" >}}


TIP: The exit status value matches with the shell convention.  But some
programs return `-1` as the non-zero value instead of `1` when errors are
encountered.

TIP: Defining `TRUE` and `FALSE` macros as the Boolean context values for `1`
and `0` are popular in the C program.  They are not defined in the `libc`
library.  So normally, user has to define them.

### libc: error.h

Here are some notable items for the error handling of the `libc` library.

* The `errno` integer variable is set to non-zero value when library functions encounter the error.
* The `strerror(errno)` function returns a pointer to a string that describes the meaning of the error for `errno`.
* The `perror("foo")` produces a message on the standard error output for `errno` with `"foo: <error message>"`

The macros for the error are explained in the manpage `errno`(3).

The values of the macros for the error are defined in `<errno.h>` header file which is a bit convoluted.  Arch dependent symlinks are marked as (*).:


| header file | action | target |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `<errno.h>`                  | defines  | "`extern int errno;`". |
|  `<errno.h>`                 | includes | `<bits/errno.h>`. |
| `<bits/errno.h>` (*)         | includes | `<linux/errno.h>`. |
| `<linux/errno.h>`            | includes | `<asm/errno.h>`. |
| `<asm/errno.h>` (*)          | includes | `<asm-generic/errno.h>`. |
| `<asm-generic/errno.h>`      | defines  | many error values. |
|  `<asm-generic/errno.h>`     | includes | `<asm-generic/errno-base.h>`. |
| `<asm-generic/errno-base.h>` | defines  | important error values from 1 to 34. |
|

TIP: Make sure to include `<error.h>` in the header if a program needs to
deal with the `libc` library generated errors.


### libc: string operations

Unfortunately, some C string functions are known to be troublemakers.

Safe coding recommendations by busybox coders

|troublemaker functions |overrun concerns              |recommendation |
| ----------------------|------------------------------|----------------- |
|`strcpy`(3)            |`dest` string                 |`safe_strncpy` |
|`strncpy`(3)           |may fail to 0-terminate `dst` |`safe_strncpy` |
|`strcat`(3)            |`dest` string                 |`strncat`(3) |
|`gets`(3)              |string it gets                |`fgets`(3) |
|`getwd`(3)             |`buf` string                  |`getcwd`(3) |
|`[v]sprintf`(3)        |`str` buffer                  |`[v]snprintf`(3) |
|`realpath`(3)          |`path` buffer                 |use with `pathconf`(3) |
|`[vf]scanf`(3)         |its arguments                 |just avoid it |

Although `[vf]scanf`(3) are marked as "just avoid it", it is not the end of the
world for the coding of the `scanf`-like logic.

The combination of `getline`(3) and `sscanf`(3) is the most portable solution
for the safe `scanf` alternative.  If the incoming data is not delimited by the
newline "`\n`" code, `getdelim`(3) may alternatively be used in place of
`getline`(3).

The use the "`m`" flag in the format string, as described in `scanf`(3) is the
other solution for the safe `scanf` alternative. (You need newer POSIX.1-2008
complient `libc`.)  It uses "`[vf]scanf("%ms", &char)`" with `free` instead of
"`[vf]scanf("%s", char)`" alone.

<!--
 https://buildsecurityin.us-cert.gov/bsi/articles/knowledge/coding/816-BSI.html
 http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2430303/disadvantages-of-scanf
 http://blog.markloiseau.com/2012/02/two-safer-alternatives-to-scanf/
-->

### libc: safe_strncpy

The `safe_strncpy` recommended by busybox coders is essentially the 0-terminate
guranteed `strncpy` with the safe data length.  Since it is missing in the
`libc` library, it should be emulated by adding a custom function definition
as:

Alternative safe string copy function `safe_strncpy`: `safe_strncpy.c`.


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libc/safe_strncpy.c" >}}


Alternative safe string copy function `safe_strncpy`: `safe_strncpy.h`.


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libc/safe_strncpy.h" >}}


Let's test string copy functions: `strcpy`, `strncpy`, and `safe_strncpy`.

Test code for string copy functions: `test_strcpy.c`.


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libc/test_strcpy.c" >}}


Test result of string copy functions by `test_strcpy.c`.


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libc/test_strcpy.log" >}}


Only `safe_strncpy` works safely as seen above.


### libc: file operations

File operation in C can be done with different levels.

* low level file descriptor based operations:
    * `open`(2): open and possibly create the file and return a new file descriptor
    * `close`(2): close the file descriptor
    * `lseak`(2): reposition read/write file offset associated with the file descriptor
    * `read`(2): read from the file descriptor
    * `write`(2): write to the file descriptor
    * `mmap`(2): map file associated with the file descriptor into memory
    * `fcntl`(2): manipulate file descriptor

Predefined file descriptor macros

{{< snippet "examples/lib/libc/FILENO.log" >}}


* high level stream IO based operations:
    * `fopen`(3): open and possibly create the file and associate the stream with the file
    * `fclose`(3): close the stream
    * `feof`(3):  test the end-of-file indicator for the stream
    * `ferror`(3): test the error indicator for the stream
    * `getc`(3): read a character from the binary stream
    * `putc`(3): write a character to the binary stream
    * `fread`(3): read blocks of data from the binary stream
    * `fwrite`(3): write blocks of data to the binary stream
    * `fprintf`(3): formatted text stream output conversion
    * `fscanf`(3): formatted text stream input conversion

Predefined file stream macros

{{< snippet "examples/lib/libc/std.log" >}}


Let's learn fundamentals of file operation by creating simple codes such as
[size of a file](#libc-size-of-a-file) or [copy a file](#libc-copy-a-file).
These example codes are not meant to be the fastest nor the shortest code.

### libc: size of a file

We can think of 4 different methods to obtain the size of a file.

* *char* : read and count characters
* *block* : read blocks and count characters
* *lseek* : move file offset and count characters
* *stat* : obtain file size from the directory it belongs

Since *stat* method works only for real files but not for symlinks, *lseek*
method seems to be the most popular one used.

Here are benchmark results of these methods using `perf` (See [Debug: level 4: perf](/en/2013/08/13/fun2prog-debug-4/#perf)).

Speed benchmark of various methods to obtain the file size.

<!-- table "examples/file/bench/perf0.txt"  -->

|Performance counter stats|char|block|lseek|stat |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|seconds time elapsed|0.060168937|0.004092420|0.002638296|0.002588425 |
|task-clock|59.126037|3.051782|1.616662|1.634113 |
|context-switches|5|0|0|0 |
|cpu-migrations|1|1|0|1 |
|page-faults|193|193|191|191 |
|cycles|154,305,859|2,428,799|<not counted>|1,297,107 |
|stalled-cycles-frontend|32,413,607|1,237,525|787,158|805,663 |
|stalled-cycles-backend|3,089,296|828,200|612,162|627,711 |
|branches|87,138,178|382,322|209,395|208,836 |
|branch-misses|14,795|<not counted>|9,023|<not counted> |

If you wish to do more than just counting characters, other methods may give
good starting point for such programs.  I will list all the source of `size.c` as below.

Read size of a file (char)


{{< snippet "examples/file/size-char/size.c" >}}


Read size of a file (block)


{{< snippet "examples/file/size-block/size.c" >}}


Read size of a file (lseek)


{{< snippet "examples/file/size-lseek/size.c" >}}


Read size of a file (stat)


{{< snippet "examples/file/size-stat/size.c" >}}


All the above example can be compiled as follows.

Example of compiling `size.c`.

{{< snippet "examples/file/size-stat/size.log" >}}


### libc: copy a file

We can think of 5 different methods to copy a file.

* *char* : copy a character at a time
* *block* : copy a block (4 KiB) at a time
* *block big* : copy a block (4 MiB) at a time
* *mmap memcpy* : use `mmap`(2) to map input and output files while copying data with `memcpy`(3).
* *mmap write* : use `mmap`(2) to map input file while writing data with `write`(2) from the memory.

Here are benchmark results of these methods using `perf` (See [Debug: level 4: perf](/en/2013/08/13/fun2prog-debug-4/#perf)).

Speed benchmark of various methods to copy a large file about 2.4 MiB.

<!-- "examples/file/bench/perf1.txt" -->

|Performance counter stats|char|block|block big|mmap memcpy|mmap write |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|seconds time elapsed|0.089096423|0.015654253|0.016963338|0.018813373|0.018040972 |
|task-clock|78.600617|5.916846|7.286212|8.114573|6.747344 |
|context-switches|12|5|5|5|5 |
|cpu-migrations|0|0|0|0|0 |
|page-faults|132|132|715|1,283|694 |
|cycles|213,622,432|8,787,602|9,975,035|9,506,449|8,258,812 |
|stalled-cycles-frontend|46,249,968|5,289,960|4,939,101|4,771,343|4,421,422 |
|stalled-cycles-backend|8,069,075|3,617,957|3,660,122|3,965,894|3,223,960 |
|branches|118,042,429|1,614,855|1,639,492|1,555,953|1,442,130 |
|branch-misses|20,800|12,048|10,295|8,539|<not counted> |

Speed benchmark of various methods to copy a small file about 2 KiB.

<!-- "examples/file/bench/perf2.txt" -->

|Performance counter stats|char|block|block big|mmap memcpy|mmap write |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|seconds time elapsed|0.002350776|0.001894332|0.001848917|0.002023421|0.002016262 |
|task-clock|1.335467|1.008275|0.954096|1.053580|1.013171 |
|context-switches|1|1|1|1|1 |
|cpu-migrations|0|0|0|0|0 |
|page-faults|132|132|132|117|111 |
|cycles|<not counted>|731,955|769,188|606,346|616,053 |
|stalled-cycles-frontend|696,792|625,996|648,758|579,552|552,678 |
|stalled-cycles-backend|536,087|495,138|513,756|455,248|434,162 |
|branches|153,252|125,526|127,090|102,813|99,467 |
|branch-misses|3,292|<not counted>|2,232|2,474|<not counted> |

The *char* method works the slowest as expected.

The *block* method works slightly faster than all other methods excluding the
*char* method which is significantly slower.

If you wish to do more than just copying a file, other methods may give good
starting point for such programs.  For example, if many programs access the
same file simultaneously, use of `mmap`(2) should have major advantage over
simple block method.  I will list all the source of `cp.c` as below.

Read copy a file (char)


{{< snippet "examples/file/cp-char/cp.c" >}}


Copy a file (block)


{{< snippet "examples/file/cp-block/cp.c" >}}


Copy a file (big block) replaces `#define BUFFSIZE (1024*4)` in the above with
`#define BUFFSIZE (1024*1024*4)`.

Copy a file (mmap+memcpy)


{{< snippet "examples/file/cp-mmap-memcpy/cp.c" >}}


TIP: The dummy `write` of 1 byte of 0 to the output file after `lseek` is the
idiom to set the size of the output file with `mmap`(2).  It will be
overwritten by the subsequent `memcpy`(3).

Copy a file (mmap+write)


{{< snippet "examples/file/cp-mmap-write/cp.c" >}}


Example of compiling `cp.c`.

{{< snippet "examples/file/cp-mmap-write/cp.log" >}}


### libc: setlocale

For decimal conversion functions provided by the `libc` library such as
`printf`(3), the 3-digit-grouping behavior depends on the locale.  Use
`setlocale`(3) to set the locale.

Localization example of `printf` as `lprintf.c`


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libc/lprintf.c" >}}


Run `lprintf`

{{< snippet "examples/lib/libc/lprintf.log" >}}


TIP: The text translation mechanism also uses the locale.  See `gettext`(3) and "`info gettext`".


### libm

Although most of standard C library functions are included in the `libc` library,
some math related library functions are in the separate `libm` library.

So such program requires to be linked not just to `libc` but also to `libm`.

Let's consider `math.c` to calculate `sin(60 degree)`.

Source code: math.c


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libm/math.c" >}}


Let's compile `math.c` while linking to the `libm` library to create an ELF executable object `math` and run it.


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libm/math.log" >}}


TIP: The linked library is specified after the `-l` option to GCC while removing the leading `lib` from the library name.

Let's list linked libraries to the ELF executable object `hello`.


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libm/math-ldd.log" >}}


* `linux-vdso.so.1` : Linux Virtual Dynamic Shared Object
* `libm.so.6` : The GNU C Library (glibc, support math functions)
* `libc.so.6` : The GNU C Library (glibc)
* `/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2` :  dynamic linker/loader

We can split `math.c` into 3 files and compile each code piece.

Source code: math-main.c containing the main() function only


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libm/math-main.c" >}}


Source code: sindeg.c containing the sindeg() function only


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libm/sindeg.c" >}}


Source code: sindeg.h containing the header information of sindeg()


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libm/sindeg.h" >}}


Let's compile these into separate object files (`*.o` files) with the `-c` option
and link them into a executable `math-main` specified with the `-o` option.

Building math-main via separate object files and running it.

{{< snippet "examples/lib/libm/math-main.log" >}}


### libdl

`libdl` provides the following generic functions for the dynamic loader.

* `dlopen`(3): POSIX
* `dlerror`(3): POSIX
* `dlsym`(3): POSIX
* `dlclose`(3): POSIX
* `dladdr`(3): Glibc extensions
* `dlvsym`(3): Glibc extensions

Let's convert `math.c` to `math-dl.c` which uses `libm` via dynamic linking
loader provided by `libdl`.  Here, function names prefixed with `v` are defined
as wrappers for the `dlopen`, `dlsym`, and `dlclose` functions providing
verbose error reporting.  So the core is just `main()`.

Source code: math-dl.c


{{< snippet "examples/lib/libdl/math-dl.c" >}}


Let's compile this `math-dl.c` by not directly linking to `libm` but to `libdl`.

Building math-dl and running it.

{{< snippet "examples/lib/libdl/math-dl.log" >}}


The `-rdynamic` option is used to add all symbols to the dynamic symbol table
to permit backtraces with the use of dlopen.  The `-ldl` option is for the
`libdl.so` library.  You do not need the `-lm` option here but need `libm.so`
library installed in the system.

### libpthread

The [thread](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_(computing)) can efficiently implement parallelism for shared memory multiprocessor architectures, such as SMPs.  The thread creation does not copy ever resources like the [fork-exec](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fork-exec) multiprocessing mechanism of the UNIX-like system.  [POSIX thread](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/POSIX_Threads) is supported by the modern GNU/Linux (with [Linux kernel 2.6 or newer]) with the `libpthread` library.  Here are some references and tutorials.

* [Introduction to Parallel Computing](https://computing.llnl.gov/tutorials/parallel_comp/)
* [POSIX Threads Programming](https://computing.llnl.gov/tutorials/pthreads/)
* [POSIX threads explained](http://www.gentoo.org/doc/en/articles/l-posix1.xml) (updated, based on [IBM developerWorks: POSIX threads explained](http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/library/l-posix1/).)

<!--  GNU/Linux でのスレッドプログラミング http://www.tsoftware.jp/nptl/ -->

TIP: We should focus on reading tutorials which are written after the [native POSIX thread library (NPTL)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Native_POSIX_Thread_Library) support.  This means tutorial should be newer than 2006.

The actual execution speed of a program on the modern CPU can be affected by many issues other than the utilization of CPU cores:

* [Out-of-order execution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Out-of-order_execution)
* [Instruction-level parallelism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instruction-level_parallelism)
* [Instruction pipeline](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instruction_pipeline)
* [CPU cache](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CPU_cache)
* [Cache coherence](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cache_coherence)
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amdahl\'s_law[Amdahl's law]

I am no expert to tell how all these fit together.  But seeing is believing. Let's use a touched-up C programs to list prime numbers based on `while`-loop style in [C with the list (variants)](/en/2013/08/05/fun2prog-prime/#c-with-the-list-variants) to to experiment with the POSIX thread programing.  This algorithm has some sequential nature.  So the task of partitioning the program into parallel and mostly independent code is non-trivial.  The observed execution time figures are significantly different.

* `prime5.c`: fast
    * single-threaded program, a uninterrupted tight code.
* `prime6.c`: slow
    * multi-threaded program, a thread started for each integer.
* `prime7.c`: very slow
    * multi-threaded program, fixed number of threads are started and controlled via [semaphore](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semaphore_(programming)).
* `prime8.c`: very fast
    * multi-threaded program, fixed number of threads are started only for the time consuming large number portion while each thread is written as a uninterrupted tight code.

Here is a benchmark results of execution times for these programs listed below.

Speed benchmark of various program languages

<!-- "examples/prime/bench/time-table1.txt" -->


|Program| real(2^20) | user(2^20) | sys(2^20) | real(2^24) | user(2^24) | sys(2^24) |
| --- | ---: | ---: | ---: | ---: | ---: | ---: |
|`prime5.c`| 0.15|0.15|0.00|5.62|5.60|0.02 |
|`prime6.c`| 0.48|0.09|1.15|7.38|1.52|18.30 |
|`prime7.c`| 0.77|0.26|1.80|12.01|5.18|27.82 |
|`prime8.c`| 0.05|0.28|0.00|1.61|10.27|0.08 |


Here, the time reported by the `/usr/bin/time -p` command is in POSIX standard 1003.2 style:

* `real`: Elapsed real (wall clock) time used by the process, in seconds.
* `user`: Total number of CPU-seconds that the process used directly (in user mode), in seconds.
* `sys`: Total number of CPU-seconds used by the system on behalf of the process (in kernel mode), in seconds.

It seems that the `user` time and the `sys` time add up all multi-threaded time figures so they may end up in larger figure than the `real` time figure for multi-threaded programs.  There are a similar `sar` command offered by the `sysstat` and `atsar` packages which has more functionalities.  But if you are looking for more insight for the time, you should consider using the `perf` command. See [Debug: level 2; perf](/en/2013/08/11/fun2prog-debug-2/#perf).

TIP: Unless properly used, the use of the thread mechanism does not guarantee the faster code.

#### `prime5.c`: single-threaded program, a uninterrupted tight code.

Source code for the C program: prime5.c


{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-pthread/prime5.c" >}}


Behavior of the C program: `prime5.c`

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-pthread/prime5-test.log" >}}


#### `prime6.c`: multi-threaded program, a thread started for each integer.

Source code for the Vala program: prime6.c


{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-pthread/prime6.xxx" >}}


Behavior of the C program: `prime6.c`

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-pthread/prime6-test.log" >}}


#### `prime7.c`: multi-threaded program, fixed number of threads are started and controlled via [semaphore](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semaphore_(programming)).

Source code for the Vala program: prime7.c


{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-pthread/prime7.xxx" >}}


Behavior of the C program: `prime7.c`

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-pthread/prime7-test.log" >}}


#### `prime8.c`: multi-threaded program, fixed number of threads are started only for the time consuming large number portion while each thread is written as a uninterrupted tight code.

Source code for the Vala program: prime8.c


{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-pthread/prime8.xxx" >}}


Behavior of the C program: `prime8.c`

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-pthread/prime8-test.log" >}}


Actually, this program is buggy for smaller than 1090.  We will debug this later.

Buggy behavior of the C program for 1090: `prime8.c`

{{< snippet "examples/prime/c-pthread/prime8-bug.log" >}}



<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
