---
title: "Fun to Program -- CLI programs"
date: 2013-08-17T00:00:27+09:00
categories:
  - coding
  - english
tags:
  - fun2prog
slug: fun2prog-cli
---

> This was originally written and created around 2013 and may require to be
> updated. (2021)

## CLI programs

The command line interface (CLI) program requires to parse its command line
arguments.  Here are simple example code snippets.

Please note I chose the coding style which is the most legible for each
language.  I know there are other ways ...

### Shell

#### Shell script (short option only)

Shell program with short command line options.

Source code for the shell script: cli_s


{{< snippet "examples/cli/sh/cli_s" >}}


Please note shell variables are used.

* OPTARG : option argument
* OPTIND : index of the next element to be processed

TIP: No long option like "`--file ...`".

The POSIX `getopts` is available as a shell buildin command of BASH/DASH.
(Please note `s` at the end. The older Bell Labs derived external command is
called `getopt`.)

#### Shell script (long and short option)

Shell program with long and short command line options.

Source code for the shell script: cli_l


{{< snippet "examples/cli/sh/cli_l" >}}


TIP: You must type as "`-a -f ...`" and not as "`-af ...`"

Here I avoided the use of `getopts`/`getopt` for long option support to gain maximum portability.

### Python

#### Python script with argparse

Simple example program with long and short command line options.

Source code for Python with argparse


{{< snippet "examples/cli/python/cli" >}}


Execution examples with auto generated help

{{< snippet "examples/cli/python/cli.log" >}}


TIP: Older programs may use `getopt` module which is not as object oriented as `argparse`.

See:

* ["argparse" in "The Python Standard Library"](http://docs.python.org/3/library/argparse.html).
* ["Argparse Tutorial" in "Python HOWTOs"](http://docs.python.org/3/howto/argparse.html).
* Comments in the file such as `/usr/lib/python3.2/argparse.py` providing the `argparse` module.

Actual module file on the system can be obtained by running The Python interpreter interactively as follows.


$ /usr/bin/python3 -q
>>> import argparse
>>> print (argparse.__file__)
/usr/lib/python3.2/argparse.py


#### Python script with cliapp

[cliapp](http://code.liw.fi/cliapp/docs/) is a Python framework for Unix-like
command line programs and provides a unified supports for the command line and
the configuration file.

This seems to be interesting and is used by the backup program `obnam`(1).

Source code for Python with cliapp


{{< snippet "examples/cli/python_cliapp/cli" >}}


Execution examples with auto generated help

{{< snippet "examples/cli/python_cliapp/cli.log" >}}


### Lua

#### Lua script (long and short option)

Simple example program with long and short command line options.

Source code for the Lua script: cli


{{< snippet "examples/cli/lua/cli" >}}


Execution examples with auto generated help

{{< snippet "examples/cli/lua/cli.log" >}}


TIP: You must type as "`-a -f ...`" and not as "`-af ...`"

### Perl

#### Perl script with Getopt::Long

Simple example program with long and short command line options.

Source code for Perl with `Getopt::Long`


{{< snippet "examples/cli/perl/cli" >}}


TIP: Older programs with short command line options may use functions such as
`getopt("af:v")` or `getopts("af:v")` with `use Getopt::Std;` which set global
variables `$opt_a`, `$opt_f`, `$opt_v`.

Execution examples with auto generated help

{{< snippet "examples/cli/perl/cli.log" >}}


### C

Writing a code with the iteration over unknown length lines is not easy with C
since it requires dynamic memory allocation for the line buffer.  We will come
back to such coding later.

#### C with getopt()

Simple example program with short command line options.

Source code for C with getopt()


{{< snippet "examples/cli/c/cli_s.c" >}}


Please note few global external variables used.

* `char *optarg`  : pointer to the option argument string
* `int optind`    : index for the next argument to be processed
* `int opterr`    : set to zero for quieting error message
* `int optopt`    :

#### C with getopt_long()

Simple example program with long and short command line options.

Source code for C with getopt_long()


{{< snippet "examples/cli/c/cli_l.c" >}}


Please note few global external variables used just like `getopt()`.

In order to avoid GNU vs. BSD incompatibility, the following may be a good idea:

* Do not define `-W` option.
* Third component of `longopts[]` must be 0. (as in the above example)
* Always put all of arguments after all the options when calling the compiled program with `getopt_long()`.

See [FreeBSD 8.0 getopt_long(3)](http://www.unix.com/man-page/freebsd/3/getopt_long/) manual.

### C++

The golden rule of C\++ programing: "If you can not find something in the C++ Standard Library, look for it in Boost libraries."

* http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc-4.7.1/libstdc\+\+/manual/[The GNU C++ Library]
* http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc-4.7.1/libstdc\+\+/api/[libstdc++ Source Documentation]
* [Boost C++ Libraries](http://www.boost.org/)

Simple example program with long and short command line options.

Source code for C++ with boost::program_options


{{< snippet "examples/cli/cxx/cli.cxx" >}}


Let's compile `cli.cxx` to create the ELF object `cli` and run it.


{{< snippet "examples/cli/cxx/cli.log" >}}


### Vala

Simple Vala example programs with long and short command line options using GLib.

#### Simple non-OOP style (no class)

Source code `cli-1.vala` in Vala language


{{< snippet "examples/cli/vala/cli-1.vala" >}}


TIP: The above example skips specifying `GLib` for the parent class since it is
the default for Vala.

Let's compile `cli-1.vala` to create the ELF object `cli-1` and run it.


{{< snippet "examples/cli/vala/cli-1.log" >}}


You can get the C source as:



{{< snippet "examples/cli/vala/cli-1c.log" >}}


Since no OOP techniques are used, the resulting C code does not have GObject
related macros.

But some libraries from GLib are used, the resulting C code has automatically
generated memory management codes such as `_g_option_context_free0`,
`_g_error_free0`, and `_g_free0`.

#### OOP style (main outside of class)

Source code `cli-2.vala` in Vala language


{{< snippet "examples/cli/vala/cli-2.vala" >}}


TIP: The above example skips specifying `GLib` for the parent class since it is
the default for Vala.

Let's compile `cli-2.vala` to create the ELF object `cli-2` and run it.


{{< snippet "examples/cli/vala/cli-2.log" >}}


You can get the C source as:



{{< snippet "examples/cli/vala/cli-2c.log" >}}


It is obvious that the Vala code is much shorter than the generated C code.
The Vala compiler took care chores of generating CPP macros for GObject
with.

* No prefix.
* `cli`, `CLI`, `Cli`: object type (= class) name
* `cli_get_type()`: returning GType of object CLI

#### OOP style (main inside of class)

Source code `cli-3.vala` in Vala language


{{< snippet "examples/cli/vala/cli-3.vala" >}}


TIP: The above example skips specifying `GLib` for the parent class since it is
the default for Vala.

Let's compile `cli-3.vala` to create the ELF object `cli-3` and run it.


{{< snippet "examples/cli/vala/cli-3.log" >}}


You can get the C source as:



{{< snippet "examples/cli/vala/cli-3c.log" >}}


It is obvious that the Vala code is much shorter than the generated C code.
The Vala compiler took care chores of generating CPP macros for GObject
with.

* No prefix.
* `cli`, `CLI`, `Cli`: object type (= class) name
* `cli_get_type()`: returning GType of object CLI


<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
