---
title: "Development system (1)"
date: 2021-04-03
categories:
  - sysad
  - english
tags:
  - linux
slug: dev-01
---

## Development infrastructure

In order to keep development setups to be simple and robust, I changed
development infrastructure.

* For package test build, I decided to move to `schroot`.
* For package build, I decided to move to `sbuild` (a `schroot` wrapper).
* For package test for each GUI setups, I decided to set up KVM.

(I was suffering sudden cowbuilder failures. That was another motivation.)

Planned infrastructure includes:

* APT proxy on the host WS.
* Avahi mDNS environment which allows to use domain name "local".
* sbuild infrastructure for the clean chroot package build.
* schroot infrastructure for the fully popullated chroot package test build.
* VM as KVM for alternative package build environment (non-GUI)
* VM as KVM for GUI package manual testing. (GUI)
* SSH connections among host WS and guest VM systems.
* [Mini private APT repo to satisfy dependency as needed.](https://osamuaoki.github.io/en/2021/04/09/dev-02/)

## APT proxy on host WS

In order to save the network traffic, I decided to set up APT proxy on the host
WS.

There are 4 good candidates.
* [apt-cacher](https://salsa.debian.org/LeePen/apt-cacher): This needs to be installed with the web server.  Older code in perl (but it was newer than apt-.  Getting replaced by apt-cacher-ng.
* [apt-cacher-ng](https://salsa.debian.org/blade/apt-cacher-ng/-/tree/debian/sid): Newer and well maintained code in C++.
  * This package is [the most popular package](https://qa.debian.org/popcon-graph.php?packages=apt-cacher+apt-cacher-ng+approx+squid-deb-proxy&show_installed=on&want_legend=on&want_ticks=on&from_date=&to_date=&hlght_date=&date_fmt=%25Y-%25m&beenhere=1).
  * This package had [some problem in 2010](https://wiki.debian.org/Simple-CDD/Howto?action=diff&rev1=51&rev2=50).
* [approx](https://salsa.debian.org/ocaml-team/approx): Less docs but its simplicity seems to make it more robust.
* [squid-deb-proxy](https://launchpad.net/squid-deb-proxy): This needs generic proxy server (No way to read cached package data)

It looks like `apt-cacher-ng` is the one for me to use.

* Execute: `apt install apt-cacher-ng`
* "Set up once" -> "keep"... -> "Allow HTTP tunnels...": Yes

Currently, I experienced funny [bug#986356](https://bugs.debian.org/986356).
For now, avoid using download URLs which require SRV support such as
`deb.debian.org` should be avoided.

### Set up proxy for the local APT

There are 2 interesting packages.

* auto-apt-proxy -- no mDNS compatible --  https://salsa.debian.org/debian/auto-apt-proxy
* squid-deb-proxy-client -- mDNS compatible -- https://launchpad.net/squid-deb-proxy

WARN: Installing `auto-apt-proxy` package without functioning proxy may cause
problem.

For my purpose, proxy is always the local for the host WS which is the gateway
WS for guest VMs(=kvm).  Simply installing `auto-apt-proxy` is suffice to set
up APT proxy for them.


## Sbuild infrastructure

Sbuild provides clean __binary__ package building environment using schroot as its
backend.

### Setup

Here, I follow https://wiki.debian.org/sbuild (I have made a few updates there,
too.).

```
$ sudo apt install sbuild piuparts autopkgtest lintian
$ adduser osamu sbuild
```

Logout and login to check you are a member of `sbuild` group.

```
$ id
uid=1000(osamu) gid=1000(osamu) groups=1000(osamu),...,132(sbuild)
```

Let's create the configuration file `~/.sbuildrc` in line with recent Debian
practice https://wiki.debian.org/SourceOnlyUpload as:
```
cat >~/.sbuildrc << 'EOF'
##############################################################################
# PACKAGE BUILD RELATED (source-only-upload as default)
##############################################################################
# -d
$distribution = 'unstable';
# -A
$build_arch_all = 1;
# -s
$build_source = 1;
# --source-only-changes or not
# (1: for "dput", 0: for "dgit source-push")
$source_only_changes = 1;
# -v
$verbose = 1;
# parallel build
$ENV{'DEB_BUILD_OPTIONS'} = 'parallel=12';
##############################################################################
# POST-BUILD RELATED (turn off functionality by setting variables to 0)
##############################################################################
$run_lintian = 1;
$lintian_opts = ['-i', '-I'];
$run_piuparts = 1;
$piuparts_opts = ['--schroot', 'unstable-amd64-sbuild', '--no-eatmydata'];
$run_autopkgtest = 1;
$autopkgtest_root_args = '';
$autopkgtest_opts = [ '--', 'schroot', '%r-%a-sbuild' ];

##############################################################################
# PERL MAGIC
##############################################################################
1;
EOF
```
You can disable and enable each functionality by assigning 0 or 1 to
corresponding variables.  You can customize this further for your GPG key etc.

Then create the baseline chroot environment as:

```
$ sudo sbuild-createchroot --include=eatmydata,ccache unstable /srv/chroot/unstable-amd64-sbuild http://127.0.0.1:3142/ftp.us.debian.org/debian
```

Please note that the above create `/etc/schroot/chroot.d/unstable-amd64-sbuild-$suffix` to be used by `schroot`.

(This file needs to be removed together with the directory tree under `/srv/chroot/unstable-amd64-sbuild` to rerun above `sbuild-createchroot` if you messed up chroot contents.)

TODO: decide on technical merits: eatmydata or tmpfs for /build etc.

Prior to every use, you need to keep it up to date.

```
$ sudo sbuild-update -udcar u
```

I added following line into
`/etc/schroot/chroot.d/unstable-amd64-sbuild-$suffix` to speed up the package
installation process.
```
command-prefix=eatmydata
```

Since I have enough DRAM and want to avoid ware out of SSD, I added
following to my `/etc/fstab`:
```
# For speeding up sbuild/schroot and prevent SSD wear-out
none /var/lib/schroot/session        tmpfs uid=root,gid=root,mode=0755 0 0
none /var/lib/schroot/union/overlay  tmpfs uid=root,gid=root,mode=0755 0 0
none /var/lib/sbuild/build           tmpfs uid=sbuild,gid=sbuild,mode=2770 0 0

```

Here, I note a few notable directories:

* `/srv/chroot`: directory containing whole initial chroot environment.
* `/var/lib/schroot/union/overlay`: directory where additional packages are
  installed during the build process.
* `/var/lib/sbuild/build`: directory where the source package is unpacked and
  build.

Please be aware, these directory may eat up some disk spaces.

### Bench mark

Very rough benchmarks were performed to see impact of eatmydata, tmpfs, and
parallel build.

System used:

* AMD Ryzen 5 PRO 4650U with Radeon Graphics (Units/Processor: 12)
* TS2TMTE220S (2TB NVMe SSD) -- used
* WDC PC SN520 SDAPMUW-128G-1001 (128GB NVMe SSD)
* Wifi (802.11ac 5GHz) to Optical connection. (about 3 M Bytes/sec)
* Source:
  * DR: debian-reference source (original not to do parallel build)
  * DR': debian-reference source (modified to do parallel build)
  * GIT: git source

Result:

| source | eatmydata | tmpfs | parallel | real    | user    | system | Note       |
|--------|-----------|-------|----------|---------|---------|--------|------------|
| DR     | no        | yes   | 1        | 20m54s  | 18m12s  | 0m47s  | Cold APT   |
| DR     | yes       | yes   | 1        | 17m08s  | 17m32s  | 0m34s  |            |
| DR     | no        | yes   | 1        | 17m56s  | 18m09s  | 0m45s  |            |
| DR     | no        | no    | 1        | 19m24s  | 18m12s  | 1m21s  |No speed-up |
| DR     | yes       | no    | 1        | 17m10s  | 17m28s  | 0m43s  |            |
| DR'    | yes       | no    | 24       |  5m02s  | 31m05s  | 0m54s  |            |
| DR'    | yes       | yes   | 24       |  5m02s  | 31m05s  | 0m54s  |            |
| DR'    | yes       | no    | 24       |  6m34s  | 35m37s  | 0m56s  |            |
| GIT    | yes       | yes   | 24       |  7m24s  | 33m23s  | 9m45s  | Cool CPU   |
| GIT    | yes       | no    | 24       |  7m51s  | 38m18s  |12m00s  | Hot CPU    |
| GIT    | yes       | yes   | 24       |  7m21s  | 35m08s  |12m34s  | Hotter CPU |


Observation for real:
* Cold APT cache  -- 10% slow down (not much)
* Hot CPU  -- 7% slowdown (not much)
* Use of tmpfs  -- no impact
* Use of eatmydata -- 10% speed up (not much)
* Use of parallel -- less than half (big gain but build log became cryptic)

Conclusion:
* Use of APT cache is for reducing repository server load.
* Use of eatmydata is for skipping unnecessary waiting.
* Use of tmpfs is for longer SSD life.

### Package build with sbuild

Package build from the source directory is simply as:

```
$ sbuild
```

or using source package as:

```
$ sbuild <packagename>.dsc
```

Hmmm... sbuild is now easier than pbuilder/cowbuilder and uses the new
bind-mount kernel feature smartly to make build environment quickly.


### gbp-buildpackage configuration

I changed gbp-buildpackage to use sbuild.

```
[DEFAULT]
# the default build command:
builder = sbuild -A -s --source-only-changes -v -d unstable
...
```
(Actually, with the above `~/.sbuidrc`, we should be able to skip options after
`sbuild` here.)

## Schroot infrastructure

For package development, creating the latest minimal chroot environment for
each test build as sbuild does is time consuming.

### Creating a schroot environment

Let's create a package pre-loaded unstable chroot environment which can run
x-apps using the schroot directly. (My user name is "osamu" and my hostname is
"goofy".)

```
$ sudo cp -a /srv/chroot/unstable-amd64-sbuild-\* /srv/chroot/unstable-amd64-dev
$ sudo cp -a /etc/schroot/desktop /etc/schroot/osamu
$ sudo tee /etc/schroot/chroot.d/unstable-amd64-dev << EOF
[unstable-dev]
description=Debian unstable/amd64 chroot development environment
groups=root,sbuild
root-groups=root,sbuild
source-groups=root,sbuild
source-root-groups=root,sbuild
profile=osamu
type=directory
preserve-environment=true
directory=/srv/chroot/unstable-amd64-dev
union-type=overlay
command-prefix=eatmydata
EOF
```

Let's install basic build environment packages to the schroot.

```
$ cd /
$ sudo schroot -c source:unstable-dev -u root
(unstable-dev)root@goofy:/# apt update; apt full-upgrade
(unstable-dev)root@goofy:/# apt install aptitude vim nano- mc devscripts sudo gitk imediff fzf
(unstable-dev)root@goofy:/# exit
```

I further customize mount points by editing `/etc/schroot/osamu/fstab`.

I also copy setting from the host PC for sudo, fzf, ... and
add a few symlinks from `/home/osamu` to `/root` as in the host PC.

### Easy access to the schroot environment

In order to access the pertinent schroot environment, I added 2 alias definitions.

```
$ echo 'alias devs="schroot -c source:unstable-dev"' >>~/.bash_aliases
$ echo 'alias devx="xhost +si:localuser:osamu ; schroot -c chroot:unstable-dev ; xhost -"' >>~/.bash_aliases
$ . .bashrc
```

The `devs` command opens a shell prompt and allows us to modify the source
chroot environment.  The changes made are persistent.  This is good for
installing and upgrading packages in the chroot.

The `devx` command opens a shell prompt and allows us to work in a chroot
session to build a source tree with access to X applications such as `gitk` as
usual.  The changes made aren't persistent.

## Install VM infrastructure

* Execute: `apt install virt-manager qemu-kvm`
* Read /usr/share/doc/libvirt-daemon/README.Debian.gz and follow it.

```
$ sudo bash
# virsh net-start default
# virsh net-autostart default
# mkdir /etc/dnsmasq.d
# cat <<EOF >/etc/dnsmasq.d/00_libvirtd.conf
# only bind to loopback by default
interface=lo
bind-interfaces
EOF
# ^D
```

### Create minimal stable VM

* Download the ISO for Debian stable. (netinst: 337MiB)
* Start virt-manager
* Create a new virtual machine from Debian stable ISO without Desktop (Use
  en_US).
  * Name as "debian10" (automtic)
  * Format: qcow2
  * Capacity: 20GiB
  * Mostly go with defaults
  * Activate virtual network
  * Guided - use entire disk
  * Write disk - Yes
  * Unset "Debian desktop environment" and "print server", and set "SSH server"
  * GRUB install to MBR: Yes, `/dev/vda`
  * Installation complete and GRUB screen -> VM started
  * Shutdown VM
  * Clone from "debian10" to "buster-mini"
  * Start "buster-mini" and login to "root"
    * `apt-get update&& apt-get install vim nano- aptitude screen gpm avahi-utils`
      * Installation of `gpm` package allows me to see mouse pointer on the
        Linux console.  This makes it easier to get out of fullscreen mode by
        moving mouse cursor to the top center. (Some times it moves strangely
        but OK for this purpose.)
      * Installation of `avahi-utils` allows easy access to local hosts.
  * Shutdown "buster-mini" with `shutdown -h now`.

### Creating GNOME VM

  * Clone from "buster-mini" to "buster-GNOME"
  * Start "buster-GNOME" and login to "root"
    * `apt-get update&& apt-get install task-gnome-desktop`
  * If you get errors from aptitude, go to host and fix apt-cacher-ng
    repository and than try again.  (Don't use `--fix-missing`)
  * Rebooting VM got me to nice GNOME system up.

### Creating sid VM for development

  * Clone from "debian10" to "sid-dev"
  * Change `/etc/apt/sources.list`

```
deb http://ftp.us.debian.org/debian/ sid main
deb-src http://ftp.us.debian.org/debian/ sid main
```

  * `apt-get update && apt-get dist-upgrade && apt autoremove`
  * `apt-get install devscripts`

## VM house keepings


### Changing hostname

To change hostname of the VM permanently, you need to edit `/etc/hostname` and
`/etc/hosts` and reboot the VM.  (The hostname of running system can be set to
"<newhostname>" just as `hostname <newhostname>` but updates of mDNS record
seen from other VMs and the host WS need reboot of the VM.)

### Setting up SSH

As long as the host WS and guest VMs are installed with `avahi-utils`, we can
use each host name appended with "`.local`" to access using good old SSH.  For
example between VMs.

```
osamu@sid-dev:~$ ssh sid-GNOME.local
```

SSH login directly to root account of a system are probably blocked.  In that
case, you must SSH into user account first and sudo/su to root.

Use of SSH key placed in user's home directory is a good idea.  Typical key
generation goes:

```
osamu@sid-dev:~$ ssh-keygen -t rsa
```

### Setting up `sudo`

Following will configure `sudo` to allow user "osamu" for root privilege.

```
 $ su
Password:
root@sid-dev:/home/osamu# /sbin/adduser osamu sudo
...
root@sid-dev:/home/osamu# echo >/etc/sudoers.d/sudo-group <<EOF
# NO password for the primary user
%sudo ALL = (ALL) NOPASSWD: ALL
EOF
```

### VM tools

I am not familiar with VM oriented tools yet.  Following packages seem
something to learn.

* https://libvirt.org/ supporting EMU, KVM, XEN, OpenVZ, LXC, and
  VirtualBox.
  * `libvirt-clients` (`virsh` command etc.)
  * `virt-manager`: desktop application
  * `virtinst`: CLI equiv of `virt-manage`
  * `libvirt-login-shell`: isolate user sessions using LXC container
*  http://libguestfs.org [FAQ](https://libguestfs.org/guestfs-faq.1.html)
  * `libguestfs-tools`: guest disk image management system

## Helper script

I created short scripts and use them to initialize Debian VMs.  This also takes
care SSH keys: https://github.com/osamuaoki/vm-setup

<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
