---
title: "Re-learning Vim (1)"
date: 2019-09-17
categories:
  - desktop
  - english
tags:
  - vim
slug: vim-learn-1
---

I could use Vim as a basic editor with TKL-keyboard while tapping some keys
multiple times.  This was functional but not so elegant!

I decided to re-learn Vim to use it __properly__.  Here is my learning memo.

For simplicity, I use `^F` to mean `CTRL-F`.

## Concept

* Use default vim (minimum configuration, if possible).
  * Use as much native functionalities.
  * Don't force Vim to behave like another program.
* 50%/60%-keyboard ready.
  * Use no cursor keys, if possible.

## Guiding voice

Here are a few insightful recommendations on the best practices for Vim.

* Voice of Vim God (Vim upstream: Bram Moolenaar): [Seven habits of effective text editing](https://www.moolenaar.net/habits.html)
* [RTFM](https://vimhelp.org/) or type "`vim '+h|only'`".
* Voice of Vim Gurus (April, 2016): [#vim Recommendations](https://www.vi-improved.org/recommendations/)
* Some interesting hints found:
  * [Learn Vimscript the Hard Way](http://learnvimscriptthehardway.stevelosh.com/)
  * [vim-galore](https://github.com/mhinz/vim-galore)

Here, I summarized my rationale behind my configuration decisions for me to
remember them.

I follow the voice if Vim Gurus from April 2016 (based probably on Vim version
7.4) as much as possible.  Back then, Vimscript was becoming more like a real
language but we didn't have native support to the asynchronously executing
background process.  Now the asynchronously executing background process
offering spell checker, lint, git monitoring, etc.  are widely used useful
features.  So I have some deviations.

Please note that I am publishing my current `~/.vim/` directory implementation
at https://github.com/osamuaoki/dot-vim .  This uses Vim 8 native package
management system via 'packadd!', `git` and `git submodule`.   This may give
you interesting hints how you want to start.

## NORMAL MODE

Unlike other editors, the existence of NORMAL MODE is what makes Vim as the
great editor which allows the minimum usage of the ALT-key and CTRL-key.

### Cheat sheet

Here is my cheat sheet to remind me of all the important key strokes used
around NORMAL MODE with emphasis on motion keys:

```
 NORMAL MODE <ESC>:  Goto BOF → gg      r +--- Next Char
 screen                   n N # ?ααα   e / +-- End of Word (non-alnum)
 scroll        ai+wW({[<sp"'`↓  ^B    t / / +- Word Next (non-alnum)
 ↓     Change c{motion} cc  c↑  ^U   n / / / + End of Word (space)
 ↓     Delete d{motion} dd  d↑  H   e / / / / +Word Next (space)
 +--+  Copy   y{motion} yy  y↑  {  C / / / / / +Till α, x  Delete char
 |zt|  Put After/Before p / P   ( / / / / / / / Find α, r  Replace char
 |^e|  "α  Use α as register    k/ / / / / / /  / EOL,  ~  Change case
 |zz|     0 ^ Fα Tα gE B ge b h M l e w E W tα fα $    gd  Goto definiton
 |^y| ↓↓↓ Split Window ↓↓↓      j ←--- Line (J for Join line)   ^]  Tag jump
 |zb| ^W + ncsvhjkl=+-_<>|      ) ←--- Sentence        ^T  Tag jump-back
 +--+                           } ←--- Paragraph       ^I/^O  Jump next/prev
      Forward Backward Search   L ←--- Bottom of Page  {visual}>  Indent →
      n N /ααα ?ααα ← Find ααα  ^D ←-- Prev 1/2 Page   {visual}<  Indent ←
      n N *    # ←--- Indicator ^F ←-- Next Page       {visual}=  Indent ⇆
      , ; tα   Tα ←-- Till α    /ααα ← Find ααα * n N  {visual}gq Format Text
      , ; fα   Fα ←-- Find α    G ←--- Goto EOF        J          Join line
   Next Prev   %  ←-- Match     [{ ]} [[ ]] [] ][ Look for {}
 Record: qα, End-Record: q, Play-Record: @α, Mark as α: mα, Jump to α: `α/'α
 Undo: u, Redo: ^R, Repeat: . , Fold: Open zo/zO/zr/zR, Close zc/zC/zm/zM
 Insert Mode: i/a Before/After Char, I/A Before/After Line, O/o above/below
 Visual Mode: v Char V Line ^V Block, Replace Mode: R, Ex Mode: : or q:
```

This is intentionally terse.  `^` is used as prefix for CTRL-key.

I found some key sequences such as `3w`, `bc$`, `ciw`, `3yaw`, … quite useful,
now.


### Hints for memorizing key strokes

Since most key assignments are chosen from the initial of the corresponding
English word, they are quite intuitive.  But, some key assignments look
confusing.  Here are my hints for memorizing such key strokes.

* Cursor move keys
  * `j` shape points to downward.
  * `k` shape points to upward.
* Screen scroll keys:
  * `^B`: Backward page
  * `^U`: Upward 1/2 page
  * `^Y`: expose up 1 line == Yester(day)-line, next to ^u (Keep cursor)
  * `^F`: Forward  page
  * `^D`: Downward 1/2 page
  * `^E`: Expose down 1 line, next to ^d (Keep cursor)

### Interesting commands

* `ga`: Get Unicode point (HEX etc.)
* `g8`: Get Binary data HEX sequence
* `^G`: Get filename and cursor position (see "`:h 'ruler'`")
* `g^G`: Get cursor position in column, line, word, character and byte
* `{visual}g?`: ROT13 (Super insecure encryption)

### Map leader key

I map SPACE-key as leader-key in NORMAL MODE since it has no practical use and
easier access than default `\`-key.

```
let mapleader = ' '
```

### Some options

I tend to set as follows in the vim startup file (`~/.vimrc` or its equivalent):

```
" make vim copy buffer bigger (default 50 lines: viminfo='100,<50,s10,h)
set viminfo='100,<5000,s100,h

" Allow to move cursor beyond for block
set virtualedit=block

```

## INSERT MODE and COMMAND MODE

INSERT MODE and COMMAND MODE are intuitive with cursor keys.

INSERT MODE is started from NORMAL MODE by pressing `i`, `I`,`a`,`A`,`o`, `O`,
etc.

COMMAND MODE is started from NORMAL MODE by pressing `:` or `/` or `?`.

You can use NORMAL-MODE-like editing for COMMAND MODE situation by starting it
with `q:` or `q/` or `q?`.  Alternatively, typing `^F` in COMMAND MODE
situation also starts NORMAL-MODE-like editing.

## COMMAND MODE

Although it is tempting and easy to map some CONTROL-key sequences to some
cursor keys, I hate to override them since they are most likely used by Vim.
Use NORMAL MODE and COMMAND NORMAL MODE.

Despite this, I decided to allow following minimal substitutions for COMMAND
MODE and TERMINAL-JOB MODE  in line with the shell command line usage of them
where NORMAL mode is not easily accessible.

* `CTRL-H` mapped to `<BS>` (actually, these are the same code)
* `CTRL-D` mapped to `<Del>`
* `CTRL-B` mapped to `<Left>`
* `CTRL-F` mapped to `<Right>`

<!--

I never use these

### Last resort inputs with `CTRL-V`-keys

Here are some non-intuitive key sequences used by INSERT MODE and COMMAND MODE
and looks like EMACS/Shell sequence.

* INSERT MODE and COMMAND MODE
  * `^H`: Delete a character before the cursor. (same as `<BS>`)
  * `^W`: Delete the word before the cursor.
  * `^U`: Delete all entered characters before the cursor.
  * `^P`: Find previous keyword.
  * `^N`: Find next keyword.

* `^Vxαα`: insert character at `0xαα`. (command mode)
* `^Vuαααα`: insert unicode character at `0xαααα`. (command mode)
* `^Vuαααααα`: insert unicode character at `0xαααααααα`. (command mode)

* `^P`: Find previous keyword.(map non-starter `<S-TAB>` to this)
* `^N`: Find next keyword.    (map non-starter `<TAB>` to this)
* `^Y`: Insert the character which is above the cursor. (Only INSERT MODE)
* `^E`: Insert the character which is below the cursor. (Only INSERT MODE)
* `^T`: Insert one shiftwidth of indent. (Only INSERT MODE)
* `^D`: Delete one shiftwidth of indent. (Only INSERT MODE)
* COMMAND MODE
  * `^D`: List all possible choices. (Only Ex COMMAND MODE to start wildmenu)
  * `^F`: open editable command history. (only COMMAND MODE)
* `^X`: start of sub-mode (`h: insert_expand`).
* `0^D`: delete all indent.
-->


### TAB in COMMAND MODE

Normally, `TAB` in COMMAND MODE starts __wildmenu__ under `:set wildmenu`.  You
can use `TAB` and `S-TAB` to chose the one you want.

### Basics in COMMAND MODE

* `:e ααα`: Edit ααα file
* `:w`: Write file
* `:wall`: Write all file
* `:up[date]`: Write all modified
* `:wq`: Write and Quit
* `:q!`: Quit (force)
* `:bα`: Edit buffer α
* `:bn`: Edit next buffer
* `:bp`: Edit previous buffer
* `:r ααα`: Read ααα file to cursor
* `:r! ααα`: Read ααα command output to cursor
* `:%s/ααα/βββ/gc`: Replace ααα with βββ for all lines with confirmation
* `:bufdo ααα`: Execute ααα in each buffer in the buffer list.

Use `|` as in-line command separator.

## QUICKFIX MODE

If you have a task to search some text to make Vim to jump to particular places
in its buffer, QUICKFIX MODE is the one to automate your process.  No more
`grep` on another terminal window.

There are 4 basic commands to start preparing jump list data.

* `:mak[e]`: Run `make` for compile-jump-edit cycle. (`:h :make`)
* `:gr[ep]`: Run system-`grep` for search-jump-edit cycle. (`:h :grep`)
* `:vim[grep]`: Run internal-`grep` for search-jump-edit cycle. (`:h :vimgrep`)
* `:helpg[rep]`: Run internal-`grep` on all help text files for
  search-jump-read cycle. (`:h :helpgrep`)

Then you access and use the jump list from COMMAND MODE.

* `:cw[indow]`: Open the quickfix window if error.
* `:cope[n]`: Open a window to show the current list of errors.
* `:ccl[ose]`: Close a window for the jump list.
* `:cn[ext]`: Jump to next quickfix item location.
* `:cp[rev]`: Jump to previous quickfix item location.

Please note there are `l...` variants of above commands.

## TERMINAL MODE

This is a new Vim/NVim feature.  Now capturing shell session is as easy.  No
more envying EMACS terminal mode.

 * `:ter[minal]`: Start TERMINAL MODE. (`:h :terminal`)
 * `^WN` or `^\^N`: Switch to TERMINAL-NORMAL MODE.
   *  I will map `<Esc><Esc>` to `^\^N` for more consistent UX
 * `^W^C`: Send a `^C` (0x03, ETX) to the job in the terminal.
 * `^W.`:  Send a `^W` (0x17, DC1) to the job in the terminal.
 * `^W^\`: Send a `^\` (0x1C, FS)  to the job in the terminal.
 * `^W:`: Enter an Ex COMMAND MODE.
 * `^W^W`: Move focus to the next window

From TERMINAL-NORMAL MODE, typing `i` gets you back to TERMINAL MODE.

### TERMINAL-JOB MODE

Don't run Vim inside TERMINAL-JOB MODE.  I ended with 'buftype' error.  It
becomes 'terminal' type.
<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
