---
title: "Debian Workstation (Bookworm) (v2023-10)"
date: 2023-10-07
categories:
  - desktop
  - english
tags:
  - linux
slug: debian-usability-2023a
---

## Workstation usability

The [older deprecated guide]({{< ref note-00038.md>}}) was used as the base.

Considering GNOME post-44 is going through major changes, I still chose to use
GNOME 43 in Debian 12 `bookworm` stable release for my workstation as of
2024-01-04.

I am trying to keep my workstation as clean `bookworm` installation as
possible.

This is non-hardware specific notes and tips. For the hardware specific notes
and tips, see also:

* [Thinkpad T14 Gen 1]({{<ref "note-00010.md" >}}) -- `hostname=goofy`
* [Sony Vaio SVT1313]({{<ref "note-00036.md" >}}) -- ~~`hostname=casper`~~ `hostname=mickey`

## Bare metal initial system installation

### Initial installation by `debian-installer`

The initial installation by the `debian-installer` should skip "Desktop
environment (`task-desktop`)" task and select "SSH server (`task-ssh-server`)"
to make it light, GUI-less, and SSH-ready.

This process installs (mostly) packages with `Priority:` values in `required`,
`important` and `standard`.

In order to place most system data and all user data eventually on btrfs while
keeping this system bootable with GRUB, I install as follows:

* For encrypted MBR system:
  * Create a large encrypted PV which holds large LV formatted to btrfs (dont
    mount nor use this) and small LV formatted to swap (assigned to be used for
    swap).
  * Create a small (10GB+) ext4 partition and install a minimum system to it.
  * Using rescue disk, [perform procedure to workaround bug as described in #1059244](https://bugs.debian.org/1059244).
  * Verify correct installation.
  * Using rescue disk:
    * Create subvolumes in btrfs for `/usr`, `/var`, `/home/osamu`.
    * Migrate data from ext4 to these subvolumes
    * Update /etc/fstab to mount these subvolumes
  * Verify correct installation (Now a dedicated ext4 partition holds only `/vmlinuz`, `/initrd.img`, `/etc` and `/boot`.)
* For non-encrypted UEFI system:
  * No special action is needed.
    * Create and select btrfs for `/`.  (The installer automatically use subvolume `@rootfs` within its partition for the rootfs.)
    * Shared partition for "EFI system partition" is automatically mounted at `/boot/efi` and formatted as FAT32.

I leave the domain name as blank. All hosts on the same local subnet can be
accessed by adding `.local` at the end of each host name thanks to Avahi
(`avahi-autoipd` package).

### Initial manual setup (minimal CLI commands)

If your system boot into the GUI console for any reason, use "`CTRL-ALT-F?`"
(`?` can be 1-6) to access Linux virtual terminal login prompt. Otherwise, you
are already at login prompt on Linux virtual terminal.

Login to the root account and execute:

```console
# apt-get update
# apt-get install aptitude sudo vim mc wget nano-
```

NOTE: If you didn't set password for `root` during system installation with `debian-installer` in the expert mode, `sudo` is configured for you and you need to use it to gain root privilege.

<!--

### Initial setup (automatic)

Running `initial-setup` script found at my repository should set up most of followings.

* https://github.com/osamuaoki/osamu-utils/blob/main/halexec/initial-setup

NOTE: See [Personal DEB package repository]({{< ref "note-00033.md" >}}) for how personal repo
is created and used.

-->

### Initial manual setup (SUDO)

For the passwordless `sudo` operation, configure `sudo` from root by adding `/etc/sudoers.d/passwordless` as:

```text
# No passowrd required for the user in sudo group
# please note the last match wins configuration
%sudo ALL = (ALL:ALL) NOPASSWD: ALL
# No password for 8 hours
#Defaults timestamp_timeout = 480
#Defaults timestamp_type = global
```

NOTE: Please note that the last matching configuration is the active one for `sudo`.

### Tidy-up package installation status for aptitude.

I use `aptitude` as the primary package maintenance tool and identify
intentionally installed packages as a scrollable list by typing in
`~i!~M~poptional` in the `l` prompt of `aptitude`.

Since `debian-installer` installed packages doesn't set the auto install flag
(`M`), I usually tidy-up them up before installing GUI packages by setting
missing `M` flags to groups of files:

* packages under `libs` section
* packages under `Depends` and `Recommends` for:
  * `apt`
  * `dpkg`
  * `aptitude`
  * `debconf`
  * `task-desktop` etc. (if installed)
* Add a few packages ...

You can print list of intentionally installed packages as a plain text with:

```console
$ aptitude search '!~M~poptional~i'
i   aptitude                         - terminal-based package manager
i   btrfs-progs                      - Checksumming Copy on Write Filesystem utili
i   discover                         - hardware identification system
i   firmware-atheros                 - Binary firmware for Qualcomm Atheros wirele
i   firmware-linux                   - Binary firmware for various drivers in the
i   firmware-realtek                 - Binary firmware for Realtek wired/wifi/BT a
i   fontmatrix                       - featureful personal font manager
i   fonts-noto                       - metapackage to pull in all Noto fonts
i   gitk                             - fast, scalable, distributed revision contro
i   grub-pc                          - GRand Unified Bootloader, version 2 (PC/BIO
i   ibus-mozc                        - Mozc engine for IBus - Client of the Mozc i
i   installation-report              - system installation report
i   linux-image-amd64                - Linux for 64-bit PCs (meta-package)
i   locales-all                      - GNU C Library: Precompiled locale data
i   lxc                              - Linux Containers userspace tools
i   lxd                              - Powerful system container and virtual machi
i   lxd-tools                        - Powerful system container and virtual machi
i   mc                               - Midnight Commander - a powerful file manage
i   python3-pip                      - Python package installer
i   python3-virtualenv               - Python virtual environment creator
i   screen                           - terminal multiplexer with VT100/ANSI termin
i   task-desktop                     - Debian desktop environment
i   task-english                     - General English environment
i   task-laptop                      - laptop
i   task-ssh-server                  - SSH server
i   usbutils                         - Linux USB utilities
i   vim                              - Vi IMproved - enhanced vi editor
```

(This intensionally ignores some outdated packages with priority=extra packages.)

### Initial manual setup (SSH)

For paswordless `ssh` operation to the new system, configure ssh server as follows from the primary user:

* Copy ssh public keys of the main machine into new machine's `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` to allow access to the new machine from the main machine.
* Run `ssh-keygen` to generate ssh keys for the new machine
* Copy ssh public keys of the new machine into the main machine's `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` to allow access from the new machine to the main machine. (optional)
* Disable password-based login via `sudo vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config` to set `PasswordAuthentication no` for all machines after setting passwordless SSH logins.

### Initial manual setup (GPG)

After configuring SSH as above, your GPG keys on `goofy` can be moved to `casper` by executing the following on `goofy`:

```console
$ scp -r .gnupg casper.local:.
```

### Initial manual setup (GNOME)

Install `task-desktop` package which pulls in `task-gnome-desktop` package to set up a decent GNOME GUI workstation with `aptitude`.

### Wallpaper for GRUB

Place your JPEG wallpaper graphics (JPEG) in `/boot/grub/` and update GRUB
configuration using  one of the followings:
* `sudo update-grub`
* `sudo dpkg-reconfigure grub-efi-amd64` # UEFI system
* `sudo dpkg-reconfigure grub-pc` # MBR system

### OS probing for GRUB

Somehow, the `GRUB_DISABLE_OS_PROBE` setting in `/etc/default/grub` seems to be
__unset__ during some automatic package reconfiguration steps involving
`grub-efi-amd64` and `grub-pc`.

Running `dpkg-reconfigure` interactively on them with `-plow` option and
answering explicitly as "Yes" to the question "Run os-prober automatically to
detect and boot other OSes?" will set `GRUB_DISABLE_OS_PROBE=false` and enable
OS detection.  This manual step is required after kernel updates etc., to work
around the __unset__ problem.

`sudo update-grub` doesn't do unset as above but requires explicit setting of
`GRUB_DISABLE_OS_PROBE=false` to do OS probing.

### Multi-boot with GRUB on UEFI system

For more robust multi-boot, I usually add following as `/etc/grub.d/40_fixed_linux`:

```sh
#!/bin/sh
exec tail -n +3 $0
# This file provides an easy way to add custom menu entries.  Simply type the
# menu entries you want to add after this comment.  Be careful not to change
# the 'exec tail' line above.
menuentry 'Debian GNU/Linux --- main SSD' --class debian --class gnu-linux --class gnu --class os $menuentry_id_option 'gnulinux-fixed-fe3e1db5-6454-46d6-a14c-071208ebe4b1' {
        load_video
        insmod gzio
        if [ x$grub_platform = xxen ]; then insmod xzio; insmod lzopio; fi
        insmod part_gpt
        insmod btrfs
        search --no-floppy --fs-uuid --set=root fe3e1db5-6454-46d6-a14c-071208ebe4b1
        echo    'Loading Linux from /dev/nvme0n1p5 ...'
        linux   /@rootfs/vmlinuz root=UUID=fe3e1db5-6454-46d6-a14c-071208ebe4b1 ro rootflags=subvol=@rootfs  quiet
        echo    'Loading initial ramdisk from /dev/nvme0n1p5 ...'
        initrd  /@rootfs/initrd.img
}
menuentry 'Debian GNU/Linux --- sub SSD' --class debian --class gnu-linux --class gnu --class os $menuentry_id_option 'gnulinux-fixed-51f9cd11-30b3-4d99-b2ed-fe411fa22ee6' {
        load_video
        insmod gzio
        if [ x$grub_platform = xxen ]; then insmod xzio; insmod lzopio; fi
        insmod part_gpt
        insmod btrfs
        search --no-floppy --fs-uuid --set=root 51f9cd11-30b3-4d99-b2ed-fe411fa22ee6
        echo    'Loading Linux from /dev/nvme1n1p1 ...'
        linux   /@rootfs/vmlinuz root=UUID=51f9cd11-30b3-4d99-b2ed-fe411fa22ee6 ro rootflags=subvol=@rootfs  quiet
        echo    'Loading initial ramdisk from /dev/nvme1n1p1 ...'
        initrd  /@rootfs/initrd.img
}
```

Since GRUB UEFI, root filesystem on btrfs data is readable and used.

If you have multiple Debian system installed, you should make a backup copy
of `/boot/efi/EFI/debian/grub.cfg` to protect it gets overridden by installing
the second Debian system.

See https://wiki.debian.org/Btrfs%20migration .

## Use of Btrfs with LUKS on MBR system

Since GRUB MBR can't access data on btrfs, `/` is placed on ext4 filesystem on
non-encrypted partition.

I still wanted to keep all user data on encrypted disk, I set up system by
mounting all `/usr`, `/var`, `/home/<name>`, etc. from the BTRFS subvolume
under LUKS encrypted volume .

This way, `/vlmliniz` and `/initrd.img`, etc. are stably available while user data are securely
stored on encrypted volume using Btrfs allowing to make snapshots.

## GNOME desktop customization

The `gnome-tweak` package installed as a dependency of `gnome` package helps to
tweak the system via GUI application `Tweak`.

The GNOME extension packages may not be robust for the update of GNOME.  So the
extensive use of them should be limited to system tracking the `stable`
release.  They are available from [GNOME Extension web
site](https://extensions.gnome.org/local/) using browser with [GNOME Shell
integration](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/gnome-shell-integration/gphhapmejobijbbhgpjhcjognlahblep)
enabled.  They can be configured via GUI application `Extensions`.

### Terminal customization

* Disable "F10"
* Use `MONO 14` or equivalent (HACK [NERD FONT](https://www.nerdfonts.com/font-downloads) MONO)
  * Install `*.ttf` files into `~/.fonts/` for a single user or `/usr/local/share/fonts/` for system wide installation.
* Add "080x24", "080x43", "127x43"
* Set shell as login shell if you want anything other than Bash.


### Wallpaper for GNOME (Settings+Tweaks)

You can set wallpaper graphics from:

* Desktop: `Settings` -> `Background`
* Desktop: `Tweaks` -> `Appearance` -> `Background`
* Lock Screen: `Tweaks` -> `Appearance` -> `Lock Screen`
* GDM3: --- Not so easy (leave this as is)

### Keyboard shortcut customization (Settings)

* `Settings` -> `Keyboard` tab
  * `Keyboard Shortcuts` -> `View and Customize Shortcuts`
    * `Launchers`
      * `SUPER-C`: launch calculator
      * `SUPER-E`: launch email client
      * `SUPER-B`: launch web browser
    * `Sound and Media`
      * `SUPER-,`: volume mute/unmute
    * `Custom Shortcuts`
      * `SUPER-\`: Name: Terminal, Command: `gnome-terminal`

(`SUPER-\` is easier to type than `SUPER-T`.)

### Keyboard customization (Tweaks)

For Vim user, mapping CapsLock to Esc as follows may be interesting:

* `Tweaks` ->  `Keyboard & Mouse` tab
  * `Keyboard` / `Overview Shortcut` / `Additional Layout Options` button
    * Click to expand `Caps Lock behavior`
      * Enable `Make Caps Lock as additional Esc`.

### Right mouse click with single button (Tweaks)

For Mac or some Sony Vaio with single tap pad button, the following allows
proper secondary-click (or even middle-click).

* `Tweaks`
* -> "Keyboard and Mouse" tab
* -> "Mouse Click Emulation" section
  * -> Check on "Area"

### Keyboard and touchpad shortcut customization (Extension)

- Installed my GNOME extension: [Quick switching of input method and touchpad](https://github.com/osamuaoki/inputmethod-shortcuts) -- source
  - [GNOME extension: Input method and touchpad shortcuts](https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/6066/shortcuts-to-activate-input-methods/)
- Log out and log in to GNOME
- Enabled shortcuts from GNOME shell extension preference menu as:
  - Input Method Shortcuts
    - `CTRL-SUPER`: English (US)
    - `SHIFT-SUPER`: Mozc
    - `SUPER-CTRL`: English (international)
  - Touchpad Shortcuts
    - `SUPER-.`: Touchpad On
    - `SUPER-/`: Touchpad Off

See [GNOME extensions for better UX]({{<ref "note-00045.md">}}) how I get here.

### Keyboard shortcut customization (Internal IM configuration)

For Japanese input with US keyboard, set IM (`mozc` etc.) configuration as:

* On a system where Control-SPACE` is usable (My Thinkpad.)
  * SHIFT-SPACE: 全角かな入力 (hiragana mode) 変換キー equivalent (activate IM)
  * CTRL-SPACE: 英数半角入力 (latin mode) 無変換キー equivalent (deactivate IM)
* On a system where Control-SPACE` is not usable (My Sony Vaio.)
  * SHIFT-SPACE:  漢字 (kanji mode) キー equivalent (toggle IM)
    * Set to activate in DirectInput
    * Set to deactivate in PreComposition

Since Windows-E style Alt-` is grubbed by Gnome Desktop, this can't be used to toggle IM for Mozc.

See my old [Japanese input on US-keyboard (in Japanese)]({{< ref "../jp/note-00003.md" >}}) and its [Google translation](https://osamuaoki-github-io.translate.goog/jp/2019/03/23/gnome-uskb-im-select/?_x_tr_sl=ja&_x_tr_tl=en&_x_tr_hl=en&_x_tr_pto=wapp#%E6%97%A5%E6%9C%AC%E8%AA%9E%E3%82%AD%E3%83%BC%E3%83%9C%E3%83%BC%E3%83%89%E3%81%AEim%E5%81%B4%E3%81%AE%E8%A8%AD%E5%AE%9A%E6%96%B9%E6%B3%95).

### Non-usable Keyboard shortcut key combos with super

- Any use of `SUPER`+`modifier`+`SPACE` or `SUPER`-`SPACE` breaks normal `SUPER`-`SPACE` for rotating input method and bad idea
- `SUPER`-`P` seems to be unresponsive
- `SUPER`-`O` seems to be unresponsive

## Application customization

### Shell setups

* `~/bin` scripts: https://github.com/osamuaoki/osamu-utils (`hal`, `sendmail-p.d.o`)
  * Key dot files in `~/` and `~/.config` are stored in this [osamu-utils repo under dot/](https://github.com/osamuaoki/osamu-utils/tree/main/dot).
  * Key configuration files in `/etc/apt` are stored in this [osamu-utils repo under etc/apt/](https://github.com/osamuaoki/osamu-utils/tree/main/etc/apt).
  * These stored dot-files are updated by `hal conf update`
  * These stored dot-files are inspected for their changes by `hal conf diff`
  * These stored dot-files are restored to active use by `hal conf install`

For restoration, you may want to use manual restoration.  This script needs a
bit more work.

### Editor setups
See [Re-learning Vim (7)]({{< ref "note-00040" >}}).

* Main editor: `nvim` with `~/.config/nvim` (alias `nv`)
  * NeoVim 0.10.  See [Building Neovim]({{< ref "note-00039" >}}).
  * Configuration by [forked LazyVim starter](https://github.com/osamuaoki/starter) in `~.config/nvim`.
* Backup basic editor: `vim` or `nvim` started by `~/bin/vi` wrapper
  * Configuration by https://github.com/osamuaoki/dot-vim in `~/.vimrc`.

Frequent commands to use:

* `bash`: CLI command prompt
* `mc`: file manager for shell
* `fzf`: fuzzy finder for shell and vim.
* `rg`: recursive code search
* `bu`: local `~/bin/` script to backup data to USB drive using `bss` as its backend.  See [Backup and snapshot]({{< ref "note-00028.md" >}}).

### Personal packages

See [Personal DEB package repository]({{<ref "note-00033.md">}}) for the method to publish personal DEB packages.

You need to add [configuration file for personal DEB package repository]({{< ref "note-00033" >}}#setting-up-secure-apt-cliant) to use them.

Here are some of my personal packages to help my command line.  The source of these are published to
my github repo and binary packages are published to my github web page.

* bss: Btrfs Subvolume Snapshot Utility
  * https://github.com/osamuaoki/bss
  * This helps me with easy backup and snapshot using btrfs.
* unzip: patched unzip (`-O` and `-I` options to support encoding of filenames)
  * https://github.com/osamuaoki/unzip
  * provides unzip-i18n
  * This replaces Debian unzip program which lacks `-I` and `-O` options to
    offer functionality available under other distribution.
    * Use `unzip -Osjis filename.zip` to unzip Japanese zip files.
* osamu-task: Osamu's Task Packages  -- WIP updating
  * https://github.com/osamuaoki/osamu-task
  * 00-min, 01-cli, 02-gui, 03-jpn, 04-dev, 05-doc, 06-typ, ...
  * This helps me with installing packages as a group.

### Web browser

Although [Chromium](https://tracker.debian.org/pkg/chromium) exists in the
official Debian repository, it lacks [account synchronization capability with
other devices since
2021](https://blog.chromium.org/2021/01/limiting-private-api-availability-in.html).
Although there are [some workarounds tips posted on
web](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/67459316/enabling-chromium-to-sync-with-google-account),
installing [Chrome](https://www.google.com/chrome/) can solve this situation
for sure.

The best solution seems to be adding APT repository by adding
[/etc/apt/sources.d/google.sources](https://github.com/osamuaoki/osamu-utils/blob/main/etc/apt/sources.list.d/google.sources)
in DEB822-STYLE FORMAT and select the `google-chrome-stable` package.

### Shotwell

Shotwell 0.30 in Debian 12 `bookworm` doesn't support HEIF image files used by
iPhone.

I installed Shotwell 0.32.1 or newer [flatpack package from Gnome upstream](https://wiki.gnome.org/Apps/Shotwell/BuildingAndInstalling).

See [HEIF image files]({{< ref "note-00041" >}}) on more HEFI tips.

### LibreOffice

Debian 12 `bookworm` (stable release) offers the LibreOffice 7.4.7.  I think it
is in good shape.

If any issues arise, I may switch to upstream flatpack package offering LibreOffice 7.6. (2023-10-08)

### Mail client

**Updated in 2023-11-24**

For the GUI access to the remotely hosted IMAP4 mail services, use GNOME Online
accounts and Evolution.  This approach works for Gmail etc. and compatible with
using other devices such as smart phones.  Evolution can also be configured to
read locally delivered mails to mbox too.  (send+receive).

I decided to configure MTA as simple as possible with "sudo dpkg-reconfigure
exim4-config" to select "local delivery only; not on a network". Everything
else can be default.  I have no more smartsost things nor `fetchmail`.

When I need to send mail from shell prompt for Debian BTS or Debian mail
gateway services, I use my "@debian.org" address and use ssh+sendmail (created
shell script `~/bin/sendmail-p.d.o`) to access a Debian host. (The similar
trick may be usable for any shell access hosts such as salsa.debian.org etc.)

I have mail configuration for:

* GUI:
  * Evolution (GNOME online account)
* CLI:
  * `devscripts` (add "`BTS_SENDMAIL_COMMAND='/home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o'`" to `~/.devscripts`)
  * `reportbug` (add "`mta /home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o`" to `~/.reportbugrc`)
  * `mail` (add "`set sendmail=/home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o`" to `~/.mailrc`)
  * `mutt` (add "`set sendmail = '/home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o'`" to `~/.muttrc`)

For Debian voting, mutt works most reliably.

## Miscellaneous tips

### Migrating user's home directory to a separate subvolume

As installed, user's home directory is in the rootfs using subvolume `@rootfs`.
Let me create and use subvolume `@osamu` for my user `osamu` and copy contents
of original `/home/osamu` into `@osamu`.  Then update `/etc/fstab` to mount
`@osamu` onto `/home/osamu`

```console
# mount /dev/sda6 on /mnt
# cd /mnt
$ ls -lai
total 16
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root   26 Oct  8 17:11 .
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root  238 Oct  8 06:41 ..
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root  238 Oct  8 06:41 @rootfs
# btrfs subvolume create @osamu
# chmod 700 @osamu
# chown osamu:osamu @osamu
total 16
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root   26 Oct  8 17:11 .
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root  238 Oct  8 06:41 ..
256 drwx------ 1 osamu osamu 610 Oct  8 17:01 @osamu
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root  238 Oct  8 06:41 @rootfs
# cp -a /home/osamu/. @osamu
# vi /etc/fstab
# cat /etc/fstab
# <file system> <mount point>   <type>  <options>       <dump>  <pass>
# / was on /dev/sdb6 during installation
UUID=01ec7a23-d2bd-4b27-a5e0-da88cfed58c1 /               btrfs   defaults,subvol=@rootfs 0       0
# /home/osamu is on /dev/sdb6 where / is
UUID=01ec7a23-d2bd-4b27-a5e0-da88cfed58c1 /home/osamu     btrfs   defaults,subvol=@osamu 0       0
# /boot was on /dev/sdb5 during installation
UUID=85827838-41ae-42e2-9081-a98ab7f819f5 /boot           ext4    defaults        0       2
# swap was on /dev/sdb7 during installation
UUID=31355cb6-e02f-4462-91a4-323dcc351ea9 none            swap    sw              0       0
```

Then reboot this machine.

### Setting group membership

Don't forget to setup group membership for the primary user (UID=1000).  Notable groups to watch out are:
  * `adm`
  * `src`
  * `staff`
  * `sudo`  --  by adding this, you enable sudo with password
  * `lxd` -- for LXD
  * `backup` -- for backup operation
  * `www-data` -- for web server

You need to re-login to enable them after setting them with e.g., `sudo adduser osamu lxd.

### Setting LXD

* Install:
  * `lxd`
  * `lxc`
  * `lxd-tools`
* Add the primary user to `lxd` group.
* Initialize LXD use environment

```console
$ sudo lxd init
Would you like to use LXD clustering? (yes/no) [default=no]:
Do you want to configure a new storage pool? (yes/no) [default=yes]:
Name of the new storage pool [default=default]:
Name of the storage backend to use (dir, btrfs) [default=btrfs]:
Would you like to create a new btrfs subvolume under /var/lib/lxd? (yes/no) [default=yes]:
Would you like to connect to a MAAS server? (yes/no) [default=no]:
Would you like to create a new local network bridge? (yes/no) [default=yes]:
What should the new bridge be called? [default=lxdbr0]:
What IPv4 address should be used? (CIDR subnet notation, “auto” or “none”) [default=auto]:
What IPv6 address should be used? (CIDR subnet notation, “auto” or “none”) [default=auto]:
Would you like the LXD server to be available over the network? (yes/no) [default=no]:
Would you like stale cached images to be updated automatically? (yes/no) [default=yes]:
Would you like a YAML "lxd init" preseed to be printed? (yes/no) [default=no]:
```

If this is on host `casper` with the primary user `osamu`:

```console
$ sysctl kernel.unprivileged_userns_clone
kernel.unprivileged_userns_clone = 1
$ cd /etc
$ cat subgid
osamu:100000:65536
_lxd:165536:10000001
root:165536:10000001
$ cat subuid
osamu:100000:65536
_lxd:165536:10000001
root:165536:10000001
$ grep _lxd passwd
_lxd:x:103:111::/var/lib/lxd/:/bin/false
$ grep lxd group
lxd:x:111:osamu
$ sudo ls -la /var/lib/lxd
total 8
drwx--x--x 1 _lxd lxd  336 Oct  9 08:38 .
drwxr-xr-x 1 root root 856 Oct  8 14:41 ..
drwx------ 1 root root  30 Oct  8 14:49 backups
drwx--x--x 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 containers
drwx------ 1 root root  28 Oct  8 14:49 database
drwx--x--x 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 devices
drwxr-xr-x 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 devlxd
drwx------ 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 disks
drwx------ 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 images
drwx--x--x 1 root root  12 Oct  8 14:50 networks
drwx------ 1 root root  30 Oct  8 14:49 security
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 757 Oct  8 14:49 server.crt
-rw------- 1 root root 288 Oct  8 14:49 server.key
drwx--x--x 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 shmounts
drwx------ 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 snapshots
drwx--x--x 1 root root  14 Oct  8 14:50 storage-pools
srw-rw---- 1 root lxd    0 Oct  9 08:38 unix.socket
drwx--x--x 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 virtual-machines
drwx------ 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 virtual-machines-snapshots
```

### Re-install and UID/GID issues

UID and GID used by some applications are not fixed.  So, if you reinstall the
exact same packages in a different order, you end up assigning UID and GID for
the application.

UID in range between 101-999 such as ones for `avahi`, `saned`, `colord`,
`_ssh`, ...  are the most susceptible on this issue.

`apt-cacher-ng` needs special attention.

### EFI-based firmware updates

Install `gnome-firmware` package and invoke GUI to update firmware on devices
supported by `fwupd` using [Linux Vendor Firmware Service](https://fwupd.org/).

Many firmware data can be updated using `gnome-firmware`.

#### Workaround for some firmware

Some firmware devices may experience some problem to be updated by
`gnome-firmware`.

Most notable one on my system was "Lenovo System Firmware".  (I don't know if
this was version dependent or not.) I used vendor's BIOS update offered as
bootable CD and made USB key containing it image data:

 * https://pcsupport.lenovo.com/us/en/products/laptops-and-netbooks/thinkpad-t-series-laptops/thinkpad-t14-type-20ud-20ue/downloads/driver-list/component?name=BIOS%2FUEFI

If the BIOS options `Security > Secure Boot` is enabled, it may restrict booting
up from the BIOS Update bootable CD image, you may need to disabled the Secure Boot option to use it.

If Windows 10 or 11 is installed, you may need to reenable Secure Boot after
this operation.

<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
