---
title: "Usability tips: Debian GNOME Workstation"
date: 2021-01-15
categories:
  - desktop
  - english
tags:
  - linux
slug: debian-usability
---

## Workstation usability

Let me keep up note on configuring and administrating my workstation under
post-Debian Bullseye (11) GNU/Linux in testing.

This is non-hardware specific tips.

### Almost standard packages

* `aptitude`
* `mc`
* `vim` and `vim-scripts`
* `neovim`
* `sudo`
* `devscripts`, `git`, `gitk`, `schroot`, `sbuild`
* `ripgrep`, `fzf`
* `hugo`
* `chromium`

### EFI-based firmware updates

Install `gnome-firmware` package and invoke GUI to update firmware on devices
supported by `fwupd` using [Linux Vendor Firmware Service](https://fwupd.org/).

Many firmware data can be updated using `gnome-firmware`.

#### Workaround for some firmware

Some firmware devices may experience some problem to be updated by
`gnome-firmware`.

Most notable one on my system was "Lenovo System Firmware".  (I don't know if
this was version dependent or not.) I used vendor's BIOS update offered as
bootable CD and made USB key containing it image data:

 * https://pcsupport.lenovo.com/us/en/products/laptops-and-netbooks/thinkpad-t-series-laptops/thinkpad-t14-type-20ud-20ue/downloads/driver-list/component?name=BIOS%2FUEFI

If the BIOS options `Security > Secure Boot` is enabled, it may restrict booting
up from the BIOS Update bootable CD image, you may need to disabled the Secure Boot option to use it.

If Windows 10 or 11 is installed, you may need to reenable Secure Boot after
this operation.

### GUI Desktop customization

Install `gnome-tweak` package to the system and tweaked to add "Applications"
to top bar etc.

After installing
[GNOME Shell integration](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/gnome-shell-integration/gphhapmejobijbbhgpjhcjognlahblep)
to the Chrome browser, I installed following extensions:
* [Hide Activities Button](https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/744/hide-activities-button/)

Adjust locally installed GNOME extensions via browser from [GNOME Extension web
site](https://extensions.gnome.org/local/).

### Keyboard shortcut customization (GNOME Settings)

For selecting IM deterministically (instead of Super-SPACE toggle), bind
javascript MACRO to keys by `Keyboard Shortcuts`.

* SUPER-Enter: English
* SUPER-J: Anthy
* SUPER-K: Mozc

For example, `inputSources[0]` (the first selection item in the GNOME input source menu) is ANTHY and if you want to use SUPER-j to switch to ANTHY, you need to set as:
```
Name     InputMethod_0
Command  gdbus call --session --dest org.gnome.Shell --object-path /org/gnome/Shell --method org.gnome.Shell.Eval  "imports.ui.status.keyboard.getInputSourceManager().inputSources[0].activate()"
Shortcut SUPER-j
```

Please make sure to enter the above command in a single line.

See [Japanese input on US-keyboard (in Japanese)](/jp/2019/03/23/gnome-uskb-im-select/) [Google translation](https://osamuaoki-github-io.translate.goog/jp/2019/03/23/gnome-uskb-im-select/?_x_tr_sl=ja&_x_tr_tl=en&_x_tr_hl=en&_x_tr_pto=wapp#%E6%97%A5%E6%9C%AC%E8%AA%9E%E3%82%AD%E3%83%BC%E3%83%9C%E3%83%BC%E3%83%89%E3%81%AEim%E5%81%B4%E3%81%AE%E8%A8%AD%E5%AE%9A%E6%96%B9%E6%B3%95)

### Keyboard shortcut customization (GNOME Tweaks)

For Vim use:
* Click `Keyboard & Mouse` tab
* Click `Keyboard` / `Overview Shortcut` / `Additional Layout Options` button
* Click to expand `Caps Lock behavior`
* Enable `Make Caps Lock as additional Esc`.

### Keyboard shortcut customization (IM)

For Japanese input with US keyboard, set IM (anthy etc.) as:
* SHIFT-SPACE: 全角かな入力 (hiragana mode) 変換キー equivalent
* CTRL-SPACE: 英数半角入力 (latin mode) 無変換キー equivalent

## LibreOffice

The version of LibreOffice available on Debian testing environment has some
glitches more often than the version available on Debian stable environment.
Issues for printing to Hagaki was the killer bug for me.

I find that the installation of [LibreOffice Debian
packages](https://www.libreoffice.org/download/download/?type=deb-x86_64&lang=en)
available from [the upstream LibreOffice site](https://www.libreoffice.org/) on
Debian testing environment is the least effort solution for me.  For stability,
I chose older stable 6.4.7.2-2 version aimed for business deployments (2021/12).
This enabled me to print nicely to Hagaki.

## Wallpaper

### GRUB 2

Place your JPEG wallpaper graphics (JPEG) in `/boot/grub/` and run
`sudo update-grub`.

### GNOME

You can set wallpaper graphics from:

* Desktop: `Settings` -> `Background`

* Desktop: `Tweaks` -> `Appearance` -> `Background`
* Lock Screen: `Tweaks` -> `Appearance` -> `Lock Screen`
* GDM3: --- Not so easy (leave this as is)

## Mail

For the GUI access to the remotely hosted IMAP4 mail services, use GNOME Online
accounts and Evolution.  This approach works for Gmail etc. and compatible with
using other devices such as smart phones.  Evolution can also be configured to
read locally delivered mails to mbox too.  (send+receive).

For the command line such as `reportbug` and daemon programs such as `cron` to
send mails to external hosts and local accounts, use of `exim4` as the locally
installed MTA is good idea.  With "sudo dpkg-reconfigure exim4-config", Select
"mail sent by smarthost; received via SMTP or fetchmail".  Everything else can
be default.

To use Gmail for smarthost, set up "Mail Server configuration" as
"smtp.gmail.com::587".  It is irrelevant for us to worry "Hide local mail name
..." since the smarthost service rewrites it anyway.  Edit
`/etc/exim4/passwd.client` as:
`smtp.gmail.com:foo.bar@gmail.com:application_password` (You need to create
`application_password` in advance.)

Whenever I wish to send out mails with "@debian.org" address, I use
ssh+sendmail (created shell script `~/bin/sendmail-p.d.o`) to access a Debian
host. (This trick may be usable for any hosts such as salsa.debian.org etc.)
I have sets up for:

* Evolution
* `devscripts` (add "`BTS_SENDMAIL_COMMAND='/home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o'`" to `~/.devscripts`)
* `reportbug` (add "`mta /home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o`" to `~/.reportbugrc`)

I usually don't bother with fetchmail these days.

### Evolution workaround (font)

Evolution for Debian 11 Bullseye (pre-release) under wayland has ugly font
problem as of May 2, 2021.  (Some firefox, too).  It looked like some similar
to WebKit issue exposed by sandboxing.
https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/evolution/-/issues/1161

Installing `xdg-desktop-portal-gtk` fixed it.

See https://bugs.debian.org/987948

## Command line

Setups:

* `~/bin` scripts: https://github.com/osamuaoki/osamu-utils (`hal`, `sendmail-p.d.o`)
    * key files in `~/` and `~/.config` are backuped to `~/bin/dot/` with "`hal conf up`"
* `vim` configuration: https://github.com/osamuaoki/dot-vim
    * Now uses native package management of Vim 8 with `packadd!`.
    * See [Re-learning Vim (2)]({{< ref "note-00007" >}}).

Frequent commands to use:

* `mc`: file manager for shell
* `fzf`: fuzzy finder for shell and vim.

<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
