---
title: "Vaio SVT1313 (Intel i5, 2013 model)"
date: 2023-02-13T00:00:00+00:02
categories:
  - desktop
  - english
tags:
  - linux
slug: svt1313-1
---

Let me keep up note on configuring and administrating my Sony Vaio SVT1313
(Intel i5) under Debian GNU/Linux.  (Updated for Trixie in 2025)

## Hardware fix

I got a second hand used old SONY PC with minor keyboard gliches.

It costed $100 as total after fixing its keyboard.

This is my hardware specific tips.

## How to access BIOS menu of Sony VAIO SVT1313

Pressing **ASSIST** button instead of **POWER** button starts PC with boot
device and BIOS setting selection menu.

## Why boot with MBR and not with UEFI

I got this machine as second hand. This PC came with [a buggy
UEFI](https://wiki.debian.org/UEFI#Force_grub-efi_installation_manually) which
refuses to accommodate dual boot scenario with reasonable usability.

* I ended up selecting "legacy" mode to use MBR in BIOS.  No more secure boot.
* I replaced the internal keyboard.  (Missing key event problems on "e", "u"
  and "Delete" are fixed via keyboard hardware replacement.)
* The card side contacts of SO-DDR DRAM needed to be rubbed by eraser to get it
  work right.
* Although I am now using this as single OS (Debian/Trixie 13) system, I am
  keeping this as Legacy MBR system.

## Full disk install with default encrypted LVM setup

In order to setup simple robust system for me to take it out for my travel, I
decided to select the full disk install with encrypted LVM while using d-i.

## Basic CLI initial setting

Install:

* `sudo`
  * Execute `adduser <username> sudo`
* `aptitude`
  * Type-`l` and set `~ooptional!~M` to set `A` on libraries auto-installed
* `systemd-cron` (no more `anacron`)
* `mc`
* `neovim`
* `nano-` (remove)
* `vim-tiny-` (remove)

## Touchpad of Sony VAIO

GNOME 48 (Trixie@2025) supports many touchpad style well.

* Use GNOME "Setting" (Gear icon on the panel shown after clicking the right top
corner) and select "Mouse and Touchpad" on left.  Then select "Touchpad" tab on
the top.  Select corner push if you want to keep old way.

For Mac or some Sony Vaio with single tap pad button, this allows secondary
click as expected.

## Basic GUI initial setting

Install:

* `gnome-shell-extension-manager`
* `gnome-shell-extension-caffeine`
* `gnome-shell-extension-dashtodock`
* `gnome-shell-extension-hideactivities`
* ...

For more, see upcoming "Debian Workstation (Trixie) (v2025-8)".

<!-- vim: set sw=4 s=4 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
