---
title: "Debian Workstation (Trixie) (v2025-09)"
date: 2025-09-03
categories:
  - desktop
  - english
tags:
  - linux
slug: debian-usability-2025
---

XXX WIP XXX

## Workstation usability

Here is the system configuration memo on my workstation running Debian 13
`Trixie` stable release with GNOME 48.  This is mostly a rewrite of the [older
guide]({{< ref note-00049.md>}}) for Debian 12 `Bookworm`.

I am trying to keep my workstation as clean `Trixie` installation as
possible.

This is non-hardware specific notes and tips. For the hardware specific notes
and tips, see also:

* [Thinkpad T14 Gen 1]({{<ref "note-00010.md" >}}) -- `hostname=goofy`
* [Sony Vaio SVT1313]({{<ref "note-00036.md" >}}) -- `hostname=casper` ~~`hostname=mickey`~~

## Bare metal initial system installation

### Initial installation by `debian-installer`

The initial installation by the `debian-installer` may skip "Desktop
environment (`task-desktop`)" task and select "SSH server (`task-ssh-server`)"
to make it light, GUI-less, and SSH-ready.  For the 2025 reinstallation of
Sony Vaio SVT1313, I chose the Gnome GUI Desktop System.

This process installs (mostly) packages with `Priority:` values in `required`,
`important` and `standard`.

In order to place all user data on btrfs while
keeping this system bootable with GRUB, I install as follows:

* For encrypted MBR system:
  * See [Rescue media(2)]({{<ref "note-00079.md">}}) for the system migration
    * A primary partition formatted to ext4 for `/` (system data).
    * A LUKS encrypted PV == VG which holds 2 LVs
      * a large LV formatted to btrfs used for `/home` (user data).
      * a small LV formatted to swap used for swap.
  * Create a small (10GB+) ext4 partition and install a minimum system to it.
* For non-encrypted UEFI system: (This is based on my experience of the `Bookworm` installation.  I upgraded it to `Trixie` via `apt full-upgrade`.)
  * No special action is needed.
    * Create and select btrfs for `/`.  (The installer automatically use subvolume `@rootfs` within its partition for the rootfs.)
    * Shared partition for "EFI system partition" is automatically mounted at `/boot/efi` and formatted as FAT32.

I leave the domain name as blank. All hosts on the same local subnet can be
accessed by adding `.local` at the end of each host name thanks to Avahi
(`avahi-autoipd` package).

### Initial manual setup

If your system boot into the GUI console for any reason, use "`CTRL-ALT-F?`"
(`?` can be 1-6) to access Linux virtual terminal login prompt. Otherwise, you
are already at login prompt on Linux virtual terminal.

Login to the root account and execute:

```console
$ su bash
 ...
# apt-get update
# apt-get install aptitude sudo vim mc wget nano-
```

NOTE: If you didn't set password for `root` during system installation with `debian-installer` in the expert mode, `sudo` is configured for you and you need to use it to gain root privilege.

### Tidy-up package installation status for aptitude

I use `aptitude` as the primary package maintenance tool and identify
intentionally installed packages as a scrollable list by typing in
`~i!~M~poptional` in the `l` prompt of `aptitude`.

Since `debian-installer` installed packages doesn't set the auto install flag
(`M`), I usually tidy-up them up before installing optional packages by setting
missing `M` flags to groups of files:

* packages under `libs` section
* packages under `Depends` and `Recommends` for:
  * `apt`
  * `dpkg`
  * `aptitude`
  * `debconf`
  * `task-desktop` etc. (if installed)
* Add a few packages ...

You can print list of intentionally installed packages as a plain text with:

```console
$ aptitude search '!~M~poptional~i'
XXX FIXME XXX
```

(This intentionally ignores some outdated packages with `priority=extra` packages.)

### Initial manual setup (SUDO)

For the passwordless `sudo` operation, configure `sudo` from root by adding `/etc/sudoers.d/passwordless` as:

```text
# No passowrd required for the user in sudo group
# please note the last match wins configuration
%sudo ALL = (ALL:ALL) NOPASSWD: ALL
# No password for 8 hours
#Defaults timestamp_timeout = 480
#Defaults timestamp_type = global
```

NOTE: Please note that the last matching configuration is the active one for `sudo`.

### Initial manual setup (SSH)

For paswordless `ssh` operation to the new system, configure ssh server as follows from the primary user:

* Copy ssh public keys of the main machine into new machine's `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` to allow access to the new machine from the main machine.
* Run `ssh-keygen` to generate ssh keys for the new machine
* Copy ssh public keys of the new machine into the main machine's `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` to allow access from the new machine to the main machine. (optional)
* Disable password-based login via `sudo vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config` to set `PasswordAuthentication no` for all machines after setting passwordless SSH logins.

### Initial manual setup (GPG)

After configuring SSH as above, your GPG keys on `goofy` can be moved to `casper` by executing the following on `goofy`:

```console
$ scp -r .gnupg casper.local:.
```

### Initial manual setup (GNOME)

Install `task-desktop` package which pulls in `task-gnome-desktop` package to set up a decent GNOME GUI workstation with `aptitude` if not installed.

### Wallpaper for GRUB

Place your JPEG wallpaper graphics (JPEG) in `/boot/grub/` and update GRUB
configuration using  one of the followings:

* `sudo update-grub`
* `sudo dpkg-reconfigure grub-efi-amd64` # UEFI system
* `sudo dpkg-reconfigure grub-pc` # MBR system

### OS probing for GRUB

No change from [older guide]({{< ref note-00049.md>}}#os-probing-for-grub) for Debian 12 `Bookworm`.

NOTE: After re-installation to my Sony Vaio, UUID of the primary partition of
secondary SSD (`/dev/sdb1`) was missing in the Linux kernel data.  This made it
un-bootable.  I made a fresh re-install to `/dev/sdb` including fresh partition
creation using newer `fdisk` with 2048 sectors before `/dev/sdb1`.  This effort
resolved the UUID detection issue and generated dual-boot.

### Multi-boot with GRUB on UEFI system

No change from [older guide]({{< ref note-00049.md>}}#multi-boot-with-grub-on-uefi-system) for Debian 12 `Bookworm`.

## GNOME desktop customization

The `gnome-tweak` and `gnome-shell-extension-manager` packages installed along
with `gnome` package help to tweak the system via GUI application `Tweak` and
`Extension Manager`.

The GNOME extension packages are available from [GNOME Extension web
site](https://extensions.gnome.org/local/) using browser with [GNOME Shell
integration](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/gnome-shell-integration/gphhapmejobijbbhgpjhcjognlahblep)
enabled.

My essential GNOME extension is
[Input method and touchpad shortcuts](https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/6066/shortcuts-to-activate-input-methods/)
(See [GNOME shell extension for input methods]({{<ref "note-00047.md">}}).)

### Terminal customization

* Disable "F10"
* Use `MONO 14` or equivalent (HACK [NERD FONT](https://www.nerdfonts.com/font-downloads) MONO)
  * Install `*.ttf` files into `~/.fonts/` for a single user or `/usr/local/share/fonts/` for system wide installation.
* Add "080x24", "080x43", "127x43" or similar
* (Set shell as login shell if you want anything other than Bash.)

### Wallpaper for GNOME (Settings+Tweaks)

You can set wallpaper graphics from:

* Desktop: `Settings` -> `Background`
* Desktop: `Tweaks` -> `Appearance` -> `Background`
* Lock Screen: `Tweaks` -> `Appearance` -> `Lock Screen`
* GDM3: --- Not so easy (leave this as is)

### Keyboard customization (Settings)

* Install Debian `ibus-mozc` package
* `Settings` -> `Keyboard` tab
  * Set up `Input Sources` with:
    * `Japanese (Mozc)`
    * `English (US)`
    * `English (intl., with AltGr dead keys)`
* `Settings` -> `Keyboard` tab
  * `Keyboard Shortcuts` -> `View and Customize Shortcuts`
    * `Sound and Media`
      * `SUPER-,`: volume mute/un-mute
    * `Custom Shortcuts`
      * `SUPER-\`: Name: Terminal, Command: `gnome-terminal`

(`SUPER-\` is easier to type than `SUPER-T`.)

(No more remap of `CapsLock` as additional `Esc` with GNOME Tweak.  I use `jk` as `Esc`.)

### Keyboard and touchpad shortcut customization (Extension)

* Install my GNOME extension: [Quick switching of input method and touchpad](https://github.com/osamuaoki/inputmethod-shortcuts) -- source
  * [GNOME extension: Input method and touchpad shortcuts](https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/6066/shortcuts-to-activate-input-methods/)
* Log out and log in to GNOME
* Enabled shortcuts from GNOME shell extension preference menu as:
  * Input Method Shortcuts
    * `CTRL-SUPER`: English (US)
    * `SHIFT-SUPER`: Mozc
    * `SUPER-CTRL`: English (international)
  * Touchpad Shortcuts
    * `SUPER-.`: Touchpad On
    * `SUPER-/`: Touchpad Off

See [GNOME extensions for better UX]({{<ref "note-00045.md">}}) how I get here.

### Keyboard shortcut customization (Internal IM configuration)

For Japanese IM (`ibus-mozc`), set it up as:

* Keymap style: `MS-IME` (default) --> Click `Customize ...`
* 全角かな入力 (hiragana mode) 変換キー equivalent for US keyboard:
  * `Direct Input` mode: `Shift Space` key : `Activate IME`
* 英数半角入力 (latin mode) 無変換キー equivalent for US keyboard:
  * `Precomposition` mode: `Ctrl Space` key : `Deactivate IME`
  * `Composition` mode: `Ctrl Space` key : `Deactivate IME` (originally `Insert
    HW Space`)
  * `Conversion` mode: `Ctrl Space` key : `Deactivate IME`
* UI consistency adjustment
  * `Conversion` mode: `Ctrl Enter` key : `CommitOnlyFirstSegment` (originally
  `Commit`)

Since Windows style Alt-`(Alt-backtick) is grubbed by Gnome Desktop, this key can't be used to toggle IM for Mozc.

See my old [Japanese input on US-keyboard (in Japanese)]({{< ref "../jp/note-00003.md" >}}) and its [Google translation](https://osamuaoki-github-io.translate.goog/jp/2019/03/23/gnome-uskb-im-select/?_x_tr_sl=ja&_x_tr_tl=en&_x_tr_hl=en&_x_tr_pto=wapp#%E6%97%A5%E6%9C%AC%E8%AA%9E%E3%82%AD%E3%83%BC%E3%83%9C%E3%83%BC%E3%83%89%E3%81%AEim%E5%81%B4%E3%81%AE%E8%A8%AD%E5%AE%9A%E6%96%B9%E6%B3%95).

### Right mouse click with single button (Setting)

For Mac or some Sony Vaio with single tap pad button, the following allows
proper secondary-click (or even middle-click).

* `Settings` -> `Mouse & Touchpad` (side) -> `Touchpad` tab (top)
* -> "Secondary Click": select "Corner Push"
* -> "Tap to Click": disable
* -> "Scrolling": select "Two Finger"

### Non-usable Keyboard shortcut key combos with super

* Any use of `SUPER`+`modifier`+`SPACE` or `SUPER`-`SPACE` breaks normal `SUPER`-`SPACE` for rotating input method and bad idea
* `SUPER`-`P` seems to be unresponsive
* `SUPER`-`O` seems to be unresponsive


## Application customization

### Personal packages

See [Personal DEB package repository]({{<ref "note-00033.md">}}) for the method to publish personal DEB packages.

You need to add [configuration file for personal DEB package repository]({{< ref "note-00033.md" >}}#setting-up-secure-apt-cliant) to use them.

Here are some of my personal binary DEB packages to help my command line.

* `bss`: Btrfs Subvolume Snapshot Utility
  * src: https://github.com/osamuaoki/bss
  * This helps me with easy backup and snapshot using btrfs.
* `unzip-i18n`: patched unzip (`-O` and `-I` options to support encoding of filenames)
  * src: https://github.com/osamuaoki/unzip
  * This replaces Debian unzip program which lacks `-I` and `-O` options to
    offer functionality available under other distribution.
    * Use `unzip -Osjis filename.zip` to unzip Japanese zip files.
* `00-min`: Osamu's Task Packages  -- WIP updating
  * src: https://github.com/osamuaoki/osamu-task
  * This comes with configuration dot files under `/usr/share/doc/00-min/examples/`

### Editor setups

I use NeoVim 0.11.4 fetched from [my HTTP repo](https://osamuaoki.github.io/http/) with `wget` and install it with `dpkg -i` as my main editor.

* Main editor: `NVIM_APPNAME=nvim_osamu nvim` with `~/.config/nvim_osamu` (alias `vi`)
  * Configuration by my [forked LazyVim starter](https://github.com/osamuaoki/starter) placed in `~/.config/nvim_osamu/`.
  * Install a few required packages found by `:checkhealth`: `git`, `ripgrep`, ...
* Fallback editor: `nvim -u NONE` (alias `v0`)
  * No configuration bare neovim.
* Fallback editor: `vim`
  * Configuration by https://github.com/osamuaoki/dot-vim in `~/.vimrc`.

See [Building Neovim]({{< ref "note-00039.md" >}}) for how I set up [my HTTP repo](https://osamuaoki.github.io/http/).

### Web browser

Although [Chromium](https://tracker.debian.org/pkg/chromium) exists in the
official Debian repository, it lacks [account synchronization capability with
other devices since
2021](https://blog.chromium.org/2021/01/limiting-private-api-availability-in.html).
Although there are [some workarounds tips posted on
web](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/67459316/enabling-chromium-to-sync-with-google-account),
installing [Chrome](https://www.google.com/chrome/) can solve this situation
for sure.

The official Chrome installer create the APT configuration file
`/etc/apt/sources.list` in old non-DEB822-STYLE FORMAT.

### LibreOffice

Debian 13 `Trixie` (stable release) offers the LibreOffice 25.2.  I think it
is in good shape.

If any issues arise, I may switch to the latest upstream flatpack package
offering from
[LibreOffice download](https://www.libreoffice.org/download/download-libreoffice/).

### Mail client

Updated in **2023-11-24**

For the GUI access to the remotely hosted IMAP4 mail services, use GNOME Online
accounts and Evolution.  This approach works for Gmail etc. and compatible with
using other devices such as smart phones.  Evolution can also be configured to
read locally delivered mails to mbox too.  (send+receive).

I decided to configure MTA as simple as possible with "sudo dpkg-reconfigure
exim4-config" to select "local delivery only; not on a network". Everything
else can be default.  I have no more smartsost things nor `fetchmail`.

When I need to send mail from shell prompt for Debian BTS or Debian mail
gateway services, I use my "@debian.org" address and use ssh+sendmail (created
shell script `~/bin/sendmail-p.d.o`) to access a Debian host. (The similar
trick may be usable for any shell access hosts such as salsa.debian.org etc.)

I have mail configuration for:

* GUI:
  * Evolution (GNOME online account)
* CLI:
  * `devscripts` (add "`BTS_SENDMAIL_COMMAND='/home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o'`" to `~/.devscripts`)
  * `reportbug` (add "`mta /home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o`" to `~/.reportbugrc`)
  * `mail` (add "`set sendmail=/home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o`" to `~/.mailrc`)
  * `mutt` (add "`set sendmail = '/home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o'`" to `~/.muttrc`)

For Debian voting, mutt works most reliably.

## Miscellaneous tips

### Migrating user's home directory to a separate subvolume

As installed, user's home directory is in the rootfs using subvolume `@rootfs`.
Let me create and use subvolume `@osamu` for my user `osamu` and copy contents
of original `/home/osamu` into `@osamu`.  Then update `/etc/fstab` to mount
`@osamu` onto `/home/osamu`

```console
# mount /dev/sda6 on /mnt
# cd /mnt
$ ls -lai
total 16
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root   26 Oct  8 17:11 .
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root  238 Oct  8 06:41 ..
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root  238 Oct  8 06:41 @rootfs
# btrfs subvolume create @osamu
# chmod 700 @osamu
# chown osamu:osamu @osamu
total 16
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root   26 Oct  8 17:11 .
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root  238 Oct  8 06:41 ..
256 drwx------ 1 osamu osamu 610 Oct  8 17:01 @osamu
256 drwxr-xr-x 1 root  root  238 Oct  8 06:41 @rootfs
# cp -a /home/osamu/. @osamu
# vi /etc/fstab
# cat /etc/fstab
# <file system> <mount point>   <type>  <options>       <dump>  <pass>
# / was on /dev/sdb6 during installation
UUID=01ec7a23-d2bd-4b27-a5e0-da88cfed58c1 /               btrfs   defaults,subvol=@rootfs 0       0
# /home/osamu is on /dev/sdb6 where / is
UUID=01ec7a23-d2bd-4b27-a5e0-da88cfed58c1 /home/osamu     btrfs   defaults,subvol=@osamu 0       0
# /boot was on /dev/sdb5 during installation
UUID=85827838-41ae-42e2-9081-a98ab7f819f5 /boot           ext4    defaults        0       2
# swap was on /dev/sdb7 during installation
UUID=31355cb6-e02f-4462-91a4-323dcc351ea9 none            swap    sw              0       0
```

Then reboot this machine.

### Setting group membership

Don't forget to setup group membership for the primary user (UID=1000).  Notable groups to watch out are:

  * `adm`
  * `src`
  * `staff`
  * `sudo`  --  by adding this, you enable sudo with password
  * `lxd` -- for LXD
  * `backup` -- for backup operation
  * `www-data` -- for web server

You need to re-login to enable them after setting them with e.g., `sudo adduser osamu lxd.

### Setting LXD

* Install:
  * `lxd`
  * `lxc`
  * `lxd-tools`
* Add the primary user to `lxd` group.
* Initialize LXD use environment

```console
$ sudo lxd init
Would you like to use LXD clustering? (yes/no) [default=no]:
Do you want to configure a new storage pool? (yes/no) [default=yes]:
Name of the new storage pool [default=default]:
Name of the storage backend to use (dir, btrfs) [default=btrfs]:
Would you like to create a new btrfs subvolume under /var/lib/lxd? (yes/no) [default=yes]:
Would you like to connect to a MAAS server? (yes/no) [default=no]:
Would you like to create a new local network bridge? (yes/no) [default=yes]:
What should the new bridge be called? [default=lxdbr0]:
What IPv4 address should be used? (CIDR subnet notation, “auto” or “none”) [default=auto]:
What IPv6 address should be used? (CIDR subnet notation, “auto” or “none”) [default=auto]:
Would you like the LXD server to be available over the network? (yes/no) [default=no]:
Would you like stale cached images to be updated automatically? (yes/no) [default=yes]:
Would you like a YAML "lxd init" preseed to be printed? (yes/no) [default=no]:
```

If this is on host `casper` with the primary user `osamu`:

```console
$ sysctl kernel.unprivileged_userns_clone
kernel.unprivileged_userns_clone = 1
$ cd /etc
$ cat subgid
osamu:100000:65536
_lxd:165536:10000001
root:165536:10000001
$ cat subuid
osamu:100000:65536
_lxd:165536:10000001
root:165536:10000001
$ grep _lxd passwd
_lxd:x:103:111::/var/lib/lxd/:/bin/false
$ grep lxd group
lxd:x:111:osamu
$ sudo ls -la /var/lib/lxd
total 8
drwx--x--x 1 _lxd lxd  336 Oct  9 08:38 .
drwxr-xr-x 1 root root 856 Oct  8 14:41 ..
drwx------ 1 root root  30 Oct  8 14:49 backups
drwx--x--x 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 containers
drwx------ 1 root root  28 Oct  8 14:49 database
drwx--x--x 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 devices
drwxr-xr-x 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 devlxd
drwx------ 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 disks
drwx------ 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 images
drwx--x--x 1 root root  12 Oct  8 14:50 networks
drwx------ 1 root root  30 Oct  8 14:49 security
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 757 Oct  8 14:49 server.crt
-rw------- 1 root root 288 Oct  8 14:49 server.key
drwx--x--x 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 shmounts
drwx------ 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 snapshots
drwx--x--x 1 root root  14 Oct  8 14:50 storage-pools
srw-rw---- 1 root lxd    0 Oct  9 08:38 unix.socket
drwx--x--x 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 virtual-machines
drwx------ 1 root root   0 Oct  8 14:49 virtual-machines-snapshots
```

### Re-install and UID/GID issues

UID and GID used by some applications are not fixed.  So, if you reinstall the
exact same packages in a different order, you end up assigning UID and GID for
the application.

UID in range between 101-999 such as ones for `avahi`, `saned`, `colord`,
`_ssh`, ...  are the most susceptible on this issue.

`apt-cacher-ng` needs special attention.

### EFI-based firmware updates

Install `gnome-firmware` package and invoke GUI to update firmware on devices
supported by `fwupd` using [Linux Vendor Firmware Service](https://fwupd.org/).

Many firmware data can be updated using `gnome-firmware`.

#### Workaround for some firmware

Some firmware devices may experience some problem to be updated by
`gnome-firmware`.

Most notable one on my system was "Lenovo System Firmware".  (I don't know if
this was version dependent or not.) I used vendor's BIOS update offered as
bootable CD and made USB key containing it image data:

 * https://pcsupport.lenovo.com/us/en/products/laptops-and-netbooks/thinkpad-t-series-laptops/thinkpad-t14-type-20ud-20ue/downloads/driver-list/component?name=BIOS%2FUEFI

If the BIOS options `Security > Secure Boot` is enabled, it may restrict booting
up from the BIOS Update bootable CD image, you may need to disabled the Secure Boot option to use it.

If Windows 10 or 11 is installed, you may need to reenable Secure Boot after
this operation.

<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
