---
title: "Fish shell"
date: 2019-10-21
categories:
  - desktop
  - english
tags:
  - fish
slug: fish-shell-1
---

NOTE (2021-01-07):

**I gave up using fish early in 2000.**  I now stick to:

* Bash for interactive shell activity.
* Dash for simple scripting.
* Python3 for non-trivial scripting.

Original note:

Fish shell looks interesting to me since it makes handling of space in the
filename a lot simpler and have simple but powerful string manipulation with
PCRE2.

* [Fish shell](https://fishshell.com/)
  * [Fish Documentation](https://fishshell.com/docs/current/index.html)
  * [Fish Tutorial](https://fishshell.com/docs/current/tutorial.html)
  * [Fish Command reference](https://fishshell.com/docs/current/commands.html)
* [Fisher](https://github.com/jorgebucaran/fisher)
  * [Awesome fish](https://github.com/jorgebucaran/awesome-fish)
* Other resources
  * [differences from bash](https://github.com/fish-shell/fish-shell/issues/2382)
  * [fish shellを使う](https://blog.nijohando.jp/post/starting-fishshell/)
  * [fish shellで文字列操作](https://blog.nijohando.jp/post/fish-shell-manipulating-string/)
  * [Debimate ... fishへ移行](https://debimate.jp/2019/06/15/%E7%92%B0%E5%A2%83%E6%A7%8B%E7%AF%89%EF%BC%9A%E3%83%A6%E3%83%BC%E3%82%B6%E3%83%95%E3%83%AC%E3%83%B3%E3%83%89%E3%83%AA%E3%83%BC%E3%81%A7%E8%A3%9C%E5%AE%8C%E6%A9%9F%E8%83%BD%E3%81%AE%E5%BC%B7%E5%8A%9B/)
  * [fish shellのconfig.fish](http://g-hyoga.hatenablog.com/entry/2016/09/23/233548)
  * [fish_configでブラウザが起動しない](https://qiita.com/naoyoshinori/items/3a7ae1d00531e7c1a5d4)

Let me make a simple deployment memo for Debian.

## Set up Fish shell for GUI consoles

### Official way to set the shell

Although `chsh` is the official way to switch the system default shell recorded
in `/etc/passwd`, this is not always the robust approach to switch shell used
in GUI consoles to the non-POSIX shells such as Csh and Fish under some Linux
GUI environment.  This is because some GUI initialization codes assume the
system default shell to be a POSIX shell.

(For GNOME environment with "GNOME terminal", it seems `chsh` works.  But the
started fish shell has `$SHLVL` to be `2` and `$SHELL` to be `/bin/bash`
which are a bit awkward.  KDE seems to have problem.)

### Robust way to set the shell

The robust way to start Fish shell is to start it from modern terminal emulator
programs such as "GNOME terminal", "Konsole", "xfce4-terminal", and "MATE
Terminal".  For them, there is a way to run a custom command as your shell from
the menu. So set this custom command to `/usr/bin/fish`.  With this approach,
you can select the started shell from the menu.

### Workaround to set the shell

If you can't easily find a way to set up the custom command for other
situations such as the "xterm", "rxvt", "LXterminal", and "Qterminal", one
workaround is to select Bash as the system default shell and to place the
following at the first line of your `~/.bashrc` to start Fish:

```
exec /usr/bin/fish
```

When you really need to start Bash, you can comment out this line to regain the
normal Bash behavior.

## GUI setup of Fish

Executing `fish_config` on the Fish shell command prompt starts browser to
set up Fish.  This sets up 2 files:

* `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/fish/fish_variables`
* `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/fish/functions/fish_prompt.fish`

Here, `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is usually `~/.config`.

## Initializing setup for Fish

User initialization setup for Fish is at `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/fish/config.fish`
which works like `~/.bashrc` and `~/.zshrc`.

I will list code snippets used in my `~/.config/fish/config.fish` as below.

### `SHELL` environment variable

Although Bash and the original Ksh set the `$SHELL` environment variable, not
all shell programs set it.  Fish shell is no exception.  Some programs such as
`mc` (Midnight Commander), `screen`, and `tmux` rely on the `$SHELL` environment
variable to override the shell setting of of `/etc/passwd` updated by `chsh`.

Set the `$SHELL` environment variable for Fish:
```
set -x SHELL /usr/bin/fish
```

Here, `set -x` is used to export the environment variable.


### Other environment variables

The next step is to migrate your old settings in `~/.bashrc`.

```
# Always override SHELL=/bin/bash and make mc/screen/tmux happy
set -x SHELL /usr/bin/fish

# Exported environment variables
set -x EDITOR vim
set -x VISUAL vim
set -x BROWSER firefox
set -x MKISOFS xorrisofs
# devscripts related
set -x DEBEMAIL osamu@debian.org
set -x DEBFULLNAME Osamu\ Aoki

# set CDPATH
set -x CDPATH . /usr/share/doc ~ ~/pub/salsa ~/pub/github ~/pub/tmp

# set PATH of normal users to include "sbin"
set -x PATH $PATH /usr/sbin /sbin

# python distutils
if test -d ~/.local/bin
  set -x PATH ~/.local/bin $PATH
end

# user's private bin
if test -d ~/bin
  set -x PATH ~/bin $PATH
end
```

### Initializing Builtin commands

The next step is to initialize Fish sell using builtin commands.

```
# User Private Groups: http://wiki.debian.org/UserPrivateGroups
umask 002
# make core file
ulimit -c unlimited
```

Here, I skipped `fish_vi_key_bindings` since web based configuration already
set it up.

### Configuring `mc`

Let's make `mc` (Midnight Commander) to change directory upon exit by
translating `/usr/lib/mc/mc.sh` to create an auto-loading function
`$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/fish/functions/mc.fish`:
```
# Equivalent of /usr/lib/mc/mc.sh
function mc --description Midnight\ Commander\ which\ changes\ directory\ upon\ exit.
  set -l SHELL_PID %self
  set -l MC_USER (id -un)
  set -l MC_PWD_FILE
  if set -q TMPDIR
    set MC_PWD_FILE "$TMPDIR/mc-$MC_USER/mc.pwd.$SHELL_PID"
  else
    set MC_PWD_FILE "/tmp/mc-$MC_USER/mc.pwd.$SHELL_PID"
  end
  /usr/bin/mc -P $MC_PWD_FILE $argv
  set -l MC_PWD (cat $MC_PWD_FILE)
  if test -r $MC_PWD_FILE
    if test -n $MC_PWD ; and test -d $MC_PWD
      cd $MC_PWD
    end
    rm -f $MC_PWD_FILE
  end
end

```

Please note:

* `${TMPDIR-/tmp}` is changed to `if set -q TMPDIR ...`.
* `$$` is changed to `set -l SHELL_PID %self`.

### Configuring `fzf`

Let's make `fzf` work well with Fish shell.  The `fzf` package on Debian comes
with a glue code in `/usr/share/doc/fzf/examples` but there is a better
solution which uses auto-loading:

* https://github.com/jethrokuan/fzf

This requires to use package manager fisher.

* https://github.com/jorgebucaran/fisher


___FIXME___ fisher dosen't work right (2019-12)

**TODO**

### Configuring `less`

**TODO**

```
# make less more friendly for non-text input files, see lesspipe(1)
#[ -x /usr/bin/lesspipe ] && eval "$(SHELL=/bin/sh lesspipe)"

```

<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
