---
title: "Wayland"
date: 2019-09-21
categories:
  - desktop
  - english
tags:
  - wayland
slug: wayland
---

Standard GNOME desktop under Debian Buster 10 has moved to use Wayland.

Although the migration from X to Wayland is mostly transparent to the end-user
like me, there are some exceptions.

## How to check if an application uses Wayland or X

* Execute "`xeyes &`" from a terminal console .
* Move mouse pointer over to an application in question.
* If eyes are responsive, it's an X application.
* If eyes aren't responsive, it's a Wayland application.

You need to have `x11-apps` package installed.

## How to reassign Caps-key as Esc-key

For vim user, reassigning practically unused Caps-key as Esc-key is very
desirable customization.  This becomes more important on laptop PCs since their
Esc-key tends to be very small.

### How to reassign Caps-key as Esc-key under Wayland.

For GNOME, GNOME Tweaks can reassign Caps-key as Esc-key for gnome-terminal
which is a Wayland application.

Old tricks based on X doesn't work any more.

### How to reassign Caps-key as Esc-key under Linux console

For **Linux console**, the default keyboard layout is shared with X and
described in `/etc/default/keyboard` on somewhat recent Debian.

```
...
XKBOPTIONS=caps:escape
```
Values used here can be found in `/usr/share/X11/xkb/rules/base.lst`.

For Bulleseye 11, changing this only doesn't change actual keyboard layout
behavior of Linux console upon reboot.  I needed to run the following command
manually in Linux console to activate this configuration:

```
 $ sudo setupcon -v -k
...
```

I suppose, Wayland system doesn't run keyboard initialization code for Linux
console upon reboot.

<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
