---
title: L17N of programs
date: 2023-04-28T00:00:00+00:00
categories:
  - desktop
  - english
tags:
  - heif
slug: l10n-1
---

The most annoying L10N problem for me as `ja` user is the font variant
selection.  `zh_CN` seems to be chosen as Asian font variant default for
`en_US` environment.  This prompted me to summarize tips here.

## L10N mechanism

L10N (localization) of programs written with proper I18N (internationalization)
may be controlled by the values of environment variables.
* `LC_*` variables are described in `locale`(7) manpage.
* `LANGUAGE` is described in `info gettext "The LANGUAGE variable"`.

According to `setlocale`(3), for glibc based programs, effective locale values
are set for each category as:
* first the environment variable `LC_ALL` is inspected,
* next the environment variable `LC_<category>, and
* finally the environment variable `LANG`.

According to `info gettext "The LANGUAGE variable"`, `LANGUAGE` value sets
priority list of translated languages.  If `LANG` is set to `C`, this is
ignored.

The current values of such environment variables on the default en_US system
can be checked from shell prompt as:
```sh
$ locale
LANG=en_US.UTF-8
LANGUAGE=en_US:en
LC_CTYPE="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_NUMERIC="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_TIME="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_COLLATE="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_MONETARY="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_MESSAGES="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_PAPER="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_NAME="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_ADDRESS="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_TELEPHONE="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_MEASUREMENT="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_IDENTIFICATION="en_US.UTF-8"
LC_ALL=
```

These values are effective inside of the `locale` command.

The tricky thing is Bash only exports `LANG` and `LANGUAGE` and the `locale`
command sets other variable values inside it.  See variables exported.
```sh
$ export -p|grep -E -e  '(LC_|LANG)'
declare -x GDM_LANG="en_US.UTF-8"
declare -x LANG="en_US.UTF-8"
declare -x LANGUAGE="en_US:en"
```

## L10Ned execution of program from shell prompt

For changing locale environment of program, you only need to change and export
`LANG` and `LANGUAGE` variables to the program to be executed.

Here, `LANG` is respected by many programs while `LANGUAGE` seems to be respected only by programs using GNU Gettext system.

I check actual situation by invoking program as follows:
```sh
$ LANG=ja_JP.UTF-8 program_name
$ LANG=en_US.UTF-8 LANGUAGE=ja program_name
```
My cursory checks yielded:

* Programs supporting `LANGUAGE` and `LANG` (`LANGUAGE` priority overrides `LANG`)
  * `aptitude`
  * `vim`
  * `gnucash`

* Programs supporting `LANG`  (ignoring `LANGUAGE`)
  * `gitk`
  * `lowriter` (Libreoffice Writer)
  * `ls -l`

* Programs ignoring both `LANG` and `LANGUAGE` (No I18N support.).
  * `git`
  * `nvim` (local compile)

The local setting not only changed messages produced by programs but also
changed default values such as the default font set used by the GUI program.  In
case of `gnucash`, even the default currency was changed by `LANGUAGE`.  So
unless I have strong reason, it seems to be prudent to use only `LANG` to set
the I10N setting.

## Normal way to change L10N

For GNOME, normal way to change L10N is:

* "Settings"
* -> "Region & Language" tab
* -> Click "Languages" and "Formats" under "Your Account" and select the
  desirable L10N setting
* Logout and login to your account from "Power button"

The negative of this approach is this requires **logout**.

## Custom L10Ned execution without logout for CLI

The use shell alias can be used to execute program under an arbitral L10N
environment without **logout** and without changing the main system environment.
```sh
alias "jwriter=LANG=ja_JP.UTF-8 lowriter"
alias "jimpress=LANG=ja_JP.UTF-8 loimpress"
alias "jcash=LANG=ja_JP.UTF-8 gnucash"
```
If above alias settings are included in `~/.bashrc`, typing `jwriter` starts
"LibreOffice Writer" under more or less desirable Japanese settings including
font choice (No zh_CN oriented gliphs) and typing `jcash` starts "GNuCash"
under more or less desirable Japanese settings including JPY as currency and
account entry names in Japanese.

This is least invasive and easy to manage.

## Custom L10Ned execution without logout for GUI

Let's make a GUI program `gnucash` started from GUI globally under Japanese
environment `ja_JP.UTF-8` while keeping your system under `en_US.UTF-8`.


Simple use of `sudo mv /usr/bin/gnucash /usr/bin/gnucash.orig` isn't robust
against package update.  Here, `dpkg-divert` must be used, instead.

```sh
 $ cd /usr/bin
 $ sudo tee gnucash.orig << EOF
LANG="ja_JP.UTF-8" /usr/bin/gnucash.orig
EOF
 $ sudo chown 755 gnucash.ja
 $ sudo dpkg-divert --local --rename --divert /usr/bin/gnucash.orig --add /usr/bin/gnucash
 $ sudo ln -sf gnucash.ja gnucash
```

Here wrapper `gnucash.ja` is used to start `gnucash` under Japanese environment.

With this set up, one can switch among different environment by changing
symlink.


You can restore the original state as:

```sh
 $ rm gnucash
 $ sudo dpkg-divert --local --rename --remove /usr/bin/gnucash
```
This is interesting configuration but a bit invasive.  So I am now staying out
of this for now.

## Set default in all applications of Libreoffice

It took me a while to find a way to set default initial values in all
applications of Libreoffice (7.4).  Here are how for each application:

* Writer/Impress/Calc -- common
  * Tools
  * -> Options...
  * -> Language Setting
   * -> Languages
    * -> Default Languages for Documents
    * -> Asian (check) and select **Japanese** -- This is **important**.
  * -> LibreOffice Writer
   * Basic Fonts (Western)
    * Set Fonts and Size
   * Basic Fonts (Asian)
    * Set Fonts and Size
* Writer
  * Tools
  * -> Options...
  * -> LibreOffice Writer
   * Basic Fonts (Western)
    * Set Fonts and Size
   * Basic Fonts (Asian)
    * Set Fonts and Size
* Impress/Calc
  * View
   * Side bar (check)
   * Open "Styles" panel in side bar
   * Select "Drawing styles" panel
     * Right click each pertinent item and select **modify** and set fonts.
   * Select "Presentation styles" panel
     * Right click each pertinent item and select **modify** and set fonts.

I came to the above from
[corresponding tips in 2014](https://ask.libreoffice.org/t/how-can-i-change-the-default-font-in-all-components-of-libreoffice-for-network-organisation-deployment/9570/3).

Saving [template with the configuration](https://help.libreoffice.org/latest/en-US/text/shared/guide/standard_template.html)
may be a trick to make these changes persistent.

[Pre-template default font settings across all applications seem to be accessible](https://ask.libreoffice.org/t/how-do-you-set-the-default-font-in-libreoffice-calc-v6-2/52814/8).  Under LibreOffice 7.4, the same can be done as:

* Calc
  * Tools
  * -> Options...
  * -> LibreOffice
    * -> "Advanced" panel
    * -> "Optional Features"
    * -> Click "Open Expert Configuration"
      * -> Open "org.openoffice.VCL"
      * -> DefaultFonts
        * -> "ja" and select item and edit

TBH, this "Advanced" trick is too complicated for me.  So
I decided to keep myself away from this.

## Set default page size in Libreoffice

Libreoffice doesn't seem to respect the setting in `/etc/papersize` set by
`paperconf`(1).  Follow
[Libreoffice wiki](https://ask.libreoffice.org/t/how-do-i-change-the-default-page-size-from-letter-to-a4/63116/2).

CUPS configuration may be performed via browser pointing to [http://localhost:631/](http://localhost:631/).

## L10N for displayed page of web content by the browser

Displayed page of web content by the browser can be set independent of GUI dialog language set by `LANG`.

For Chrome, click "customize and control" at the top-right corner to display "Settings".  Then click "Languages" and configure "Preferred languages".

<!-- vim:set sw=4 sts=4 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
