---
title: "Re-learning Vim (11)"
date: 2024-06-25T00:00:00+00:00
categories:
  - desktop
  - english
tags:
  - vim
slug: vim-learn-11
---

## Frequently used (n)vim actions

Here are my frequently used vim tricks under my LazyVim settings.

* change VIM operation mode
  * `<esc>` or quick `jk` -- INSERT to NORMAL
  * `a` / `A` -- NORMAL to INSERT (after cursor/line)
  * `i` / `I` -- NORMAL to INSERT (before cursor/line)
  * `o` / `O` -- NORMAL to INSERT with a open line (after/before)
  * `R` -- NORMAL to REPLACE (on cursor)
    * `r` is for single char and not so useful (?may remap to `R`?)
  * `v` / `V` / `<C-v>` -- NORMAL to VISUAL / V-LINE / V-BLOCK
* cursor motions
  * `h` / `j` / `k` / `l` -- cursor move
    * `j` shape points to downward.
    * `k` shape points to upward.
  * `<c-h>` / `<c-j>` / `<c-k>` / `<c-l>` -- window jump
  * `H` / `L` -- tabline jump  (remapped)
    * `J` -- join line,  `K` -- LSP
  * `<C-left>` / `<c-down>` / `<c-up>` / `<c-right>` -- window resize
  * `w` `b` and `W` `B` -- next(forward)/previous(backward) start of word
  * `e` `ge` and `E` `gE` -- next/previous end of word
  * `g` and `]` and `[` + α -- move with which-key selection
  * `gg` -- move to the top of file
  * `G` -- move to the bottom of file
  * `0` -- move to the first column of the line
  * `^` -- move to the first non-white space char of the line
  * `$` -- move to the last column of the line
* screen motions and foldings
  * `<c-b>` / `<c-u>` / `<c-d>` / `<c-f>` -- screen jump (up, up/2, down/2, down)
  * `zt` -- position cursor line at the top of screen
  * `zz` -- position cursor line at the center of screen
  * `zb` -- position cursor line at the bottom of screen
  * `z` + α -- fold operations with which-key selection
* actions
  * `u` -- Undo
  * `<C-r>` -- Redo
  * `.` -- Repeat
* actions cut and paste like
  * `p` -- paste (after)
  * `P` -- paste (before)
  * `dd` -- delete a whole line
  * `D` -- delete cursor to the end of line
  * `cc` -- delete a whole line and insert
  * `C` -- delete cursor to the end of line and insert
  * `J` -- join with the next line
  * `c` / `d` / `y` + `{motion}` -- actions with motion or text objects
    * `ciw` change in a word (inside)
    * `cib` change in a whole balanced `(...)` `[...]` `{...}`
    * `cit` change in a whole balanced `<tag>...</tag>`
    * `ci"` change in a whole balanced `"..."`
    * `c5e` change next 5 words from cursor
  * `v` + cursor moves + `c` / `d` / `y` -- actions with visual selection
* actions with MACRO
  * `q` + β -- record MACRO as β
  * `q` -- End-Recording MACRO
  * `@` + β -- Play Recorded MACRO
  * `Q` -- Play the last Recorded MACRO
  * `<C-r>` + α -- paste with selection + α
* searches
  * `f` / `F` / `t` / `T` + `{char}` -- repeat with `,` and `;` (`fβi` == `tβa`)
  * `/` / `?` + `{string}` -- repeat with `n` and `N`
  * `*` / `#` -- repeat with `n` and `N`
  * `m` + β -- mark as β
  * `'` + β -- jump to β (You may use ` `` (backtick) instead of `'`)
* global substitutions
  * `:%s/pattern/subst/gc` -- all lines in the file
  * `:cdo s/pattern/subst/gc` -- all quickfix lines
* reformat (`V-LINE` mode)
  * `gq` -- reformat LSP
  * `gw` -- reformat VIM
  * `=` -- re-indent
  * `>` -- increase indent
  * `<` -- reduce indent
* Tag jumps
  * `<C-]>` -- jump to link-destination
  * `<C-t>` -- jump back to link-source
  * `<C-i>` / `<C-o>`: jump next / previous link-destination
* quickfix tricks
  * `:vim /pattern/ %` -- search within a file
  * `:gr 'pattern' ##` -- search within all open files
  * `:cdo {cmd}` and `:cfdo {cmd}` -- execute `{cmd}` for all quickfix items
  * `:cex script.sh`
  * `[q` and `]q` mapped to `:cprev` and `:cnext`
  * `:packadd cfilter` and use `:Cfilter[!]`
    * `:colder` and `:cnewer`
  * Telescope
    * `<Tab>` / `<S-Tab>` to mark list item
    * `<c-q>` / `<m-q>` to create a down-selected (reverse) list

Here, I used:

* "α" for a which-key prompted key input.
* "β" for a single character input.

## Benefit of LazyVim over plain Nvim

Linters and formaters assisted by easy install via mason are the biggest benefit of using LazyVim.

## LazyVim specific tricks

Now `:message` is shown in pop-up.  Use `<leader>snh` to check.

## Give up for now

* Stay out of "Lication list" and stick to "Quickfix List"
* Stay out of DAP
* Keep tab and navigate with `H` / `L` and give up using their native functions.

## Future TODOs

* History related tricks with "Quickfix List".
  * Save and restore
  * Menu select
* Learn to use Telescope programing

<!--
REDIRECT:

https://github.com/sbulav/nredir.nvim

```
-- save, might need to restore later
real_stdout = io.stdout

file = io.open ('stdout.log', 'w')
io.stdout = file

.... -- call external API

-- restore
io.stdout = real_stdout
```

or to file

```
:help redir
:redir >name_of_registers_file
:registers
:redir END
:r name_of_registers_file
:help redir
```

```
:redir @a
:set all
:redir END
```

-->
