---
title: "Debian Workstation (usability) (version 2023)"
date: 2023-02-25
categories:
  - desktop
  - english
tags:
  - linux
slug: debian-usability-2023
---

This is an updated guide based on the older [guide]({{< ref "note-00011.md" >}}).

## Workstation usability

Let me update note on configuring and administrating my workstation under
post-Debian Bookworm (12) GNU/Linux in testing.

This is non-hardware specific notes and tips.

## Installer installed extra packages

After the initial installation by the `debian-installer`, packages with `Priority:` values `required`, `important` and `standard` are installed.

### Initial setup

Running `initial-setup` script found at my repository should set up basics for
my needs.

* https://github.com/osamuaoki/osamu-utils/blob/main/halexec/initial-setup

Just executing `./initial-setup` creates
`/etc/apt/sources.d/osamuaoki.sources` as described in 
[Development system (4)]({{< ref "note-00033.md" >}})
and installs `sudo` and `aptitude`. This also sets up `sudo` as passwordless.

### Tidy-up package installation status for aptitude.

Since I use `aptitude` as the primary package maintenance tool, I usually
tidy-up package auto install flags (`M`) missing for some libraries after the
initial install.

Use of `~i!~M~poptional` in `l` prompt in `aptitude` to
set library packages as auto-installed.  If some of them are not used by other
program, let them remove.

Now you can verify intentionally installed packages with:

```shell
$ aptitude search '~i!~M~poptional'
```
Development system (4)
(This intensionally ignores some outdated packages with priority=extra packages.)

### Install typical packages

Typically, installing `00-typ` and `00-notex` sets up a decent workstation.

### Set-up GRUB

In order to probe OSs on other drives, add a following line to
`/etc/default/grub`:

```shell
GRUB_DISABLE_OS_PROBER=false
```

This is good idea for dual-boot on MBR disk.

But this is not so robust for btrfs.

#### Multi-boot with GRUB

For more robust multi-boot, I usually add following as `/etc/grub.d/40_fixed_linux` (The first line should be #!/bin/bash without space. Intentional mistype to avoid missing line):

```shell
#!/bin/sh
exec tail -n +3 $0
# This file provides an easy way to add custom menu entries.  Simply type the
# menu entries you want to add after this comment.  Be careful not to change
# the 'exec tail' line above.
menuentry 'Debian GNU/Linux --- main SSD' --class debian --class gnu-linux --class gnu --class os $menuentry_id_option 'gnulinux-fixed-fe3e1db5-6454-46d6-a14c-071208ebe4b1' {
        load_video
        insmod gzio
        if [ x$grub_platform = xxen ]; then insmod xzio; insmod lzopio; fi
        insmod part_gpt
        insmod btrfs
        search --no-floppy --fs-uuid --set=root fe3e1db5-6454-46d6-a14c-071208ebe4b1
        echo    'Loading Linux from /dev/nvme0n1p5 ...'
        linux   /@rootfs/vmlinuz root=UUID=fe3e1db5-6454-46d6-a14c-071208ebe4b1 ro rootflags=subvol=@rootfs  quiet
        echo    'Loading initial ramdisk from /dev/nvme0n1p5 ...'
        initrd  /@rootfs/initrd.img
}
menuentry 'Debian GNU/Linux --- sub SSD' --class debian --class gnu-linux --class gnu --class os $menuentry_id_option 'gnulinux-fixed-51f9cd11-30b3-4d99-b2ed-fe411fa22ee6' {
        load_video
        insmod gzio
        if [ x$grub_platform = xxen ]; then insmod xzio; insmod lzopio; fi
        insmod part_gpt
        insmod btrfs
        search --no-floppy --fs-uuid --set=root 51f9cd11-30b3-4d99-b2ed-fe411fa22ee6
        echo    'Loading Linux from /dev/nvme1n1p1 ...'
        linux   /@rootfs/vmlinuz root=UUID=51f9cd11-30b3-4d99-b2ed-fe411fa22ee6 ro rootflags=subvol=@rootfs  quiet
        echo    'Loading initial ramdisk from /dev/nvme1n1p1 ...'
        initrd  /@rootfs/initrd.img
}
```

If you have multiple Debian system installed, you should make a backup copy
of `/boot/efi/EFI/debian/grub.cfg` to protect it gets overridden by installing
the second Debian system.

See https://wiki.debian.org/Btrfs%20migration .


## Re-install and UID/GID issues

UID and GID used by some applications are not fixed.  So, if you reinstall the
exact same packages in a different order, you end up assigning UID and GID for
the application.

UID in range between 101-999 such as ones for `avahi`, `saned`, `colord`,
`_ssh`, ...  are the most susceptible on this issue.

`apt-cacher-ng` needs special attention.

## EFI-based firmware updates

Install `gnome-firmware` package and invoke GUI to update firmware on devices
supported by `fwupd` using [Linux Vendor Firmware Service](https://fwupd.org/).

Many firmware data can be updated using `gnome-firmware`.

### Workaround for some firmware

Some firmware devices may experience some problem to be updated by
`gnome-firmware`.

Most notable one on my system was "Lenovo System Firmware".  (I don't know if
this was version dependent or not.) I used vendor's BIOS update offered as
bootable CD and made USB key containing it image data:

 * https://pcsupport.lenovo.com/us/en/products/laptops-and-netbooks/thinkpad-t-series-laptops/thinkpad-t14-type-20ud-20ue/downloads/driver-list/component?name=BIOS%2FUEFI

If the BIOS options `Security > Secure Boot` is enabled, it may restrict booting
up from the BIOS Update bootable CD image, you may need to disabled the Secure Boot option to use it.

If Windows 10 or 11 is installed, you may need to reenable Secure Boot after
this operation.

## Desktop customization

These settings need to be set again after some major update of GNOME.

### GUI Desktop customization

The `gnome-tweak` package installed as a dependency of `gnome` package helps to tweak the system.
For example, you can add "Applications" to top bar etc.

After installing
[GNOME Shell integration](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/gnome-shell-integration/gphhapmejobijbbhgpjhcjognlahblep)
to the Chrome browser, I installed following extensions:
* [Hide Activities Button](https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/744/hide-activities-button/)

Adjust locally installed GNOME extensions via browser from [GNOME Extension web
site](https://extensions.gnome.org/local/).

### Terminal customization

* Use `MONO 14` or equivalent (HACK NERD FONT MONO)
* Disable "F10"
* Shell as login shell if you want anything other than Bash.

### Keyboard shortcut customization (GNOME Settings)

For selecting IM deterministically (instead of Super-SPACE toggle), bind
javascript MACRO to keys by `Keyboard Shortcuts`.

* SUPER-Enter: English
* SUPER-J: Anthy
* SUPER-K: Mozc

For example, `inputSources[0]` (the first selection item in the GNOME input source menu) is ANTHY and if you want to use SUPER-j to switch to ANTHY, you need to set as:
```shell
Name     InputMethod_0
Command  gdbus call --session --dest org.gnome.Shell --object-path /org/gnome/Shell --method org.gnome.Shell.Eval  "imports.ui.status.keyboard.getInputSourceManager().inputSources[0].activate()"
Shortcut SUPER-j
```

Please make sure to enter the above command in a single line.

See [Japanese input on US-keyboard (in Japanese)](/jp/2019/03/23/gnome-uskb-im-select/) [Google translation](https://osamuaoki-github-io.translate.goog/jp/2019/03/23/gnome-uskb-im-select/?_x_tr_sl=ja&_x_tr_tl=en&_x_tr_hl=en&_x_tr_pto=wapp#%E6%97%A5%E6%9C%AC%E8%AA%9E%E3%82%AD%E3%83%BC%E3%83%9C%E3%83%BC%E3%83%89%E3%81%AEim%E5%81%B4%E3%81%AE%E8%A8%AD%E5%AE%9A%E6%96%B9%E6%B3%95)

### Keyboard shortcut customization (GNOME Tweaks)

For Vim use:
* Click `Keyboard & Mouse` tab
* Click `Keyboard` / `Overview Shortcut` / `Additional Layout Options` button
* Click to expand `Caps Lock behavior`
* Enable `Make Caps Lock as additional Esc`.

### Keyboard shortcut customization (IM)

For Japanese input with US keyboard, set IM (anthy etc.) as:
* SHIFT-SPACE: 全角かな入力 (hiragana mode) 変換キー equivalent
* CTRL-SPACE: 英数半角入力 (latin mode) 無変換キー equivalent

## LibreOffice

The version of LibreOffice available on Debian testing environment has some
glitches more often than the version available on Debian stable environment.
Issues for printing to Hagaki was the killer bug for me.

I find that the installation of [LibreOffice Debian
packages](https://www.libreoffice.org/download/download/?type=deb-x86_64&lang=en)
available from [the upstream LibreOffice site](https://www.libreoffice.org/) on
Debian testing environment is the least effort solution for me.  For stability,
I chose older stable 6.4.7.2-2 version aimed for business deployments (2021/12).
This enabled me to print nicely to Hagaki.

## Wallpaper

### GRUB 2

Place your JPEG wallpaper graphics (JPEG) in `/boot/grub/` and run
`sudo update-grub` or `sudo dpkg-reconfigure grub-efi-amd64`.

### GNOME

You can set wallpaper graphics from:

* Desktop: `Settings` -> `Background`

* Desktop: `Tweaks` -> `Appearance` -> `Background`
* Lock Screen: `Tweaks` -> `Appearance` -> `Lock Screen`
* GDM3: --- Not so easy (leave this as is)

## Mail

For the GUI access to the remotely hosted IMAP4 mail services, use GNOME Online
accounts and Evolution.  This approach works for Gmail etc. and compatible with
using other devices such as smart phones.  Evolution can also be configured to
read locally delivered mails to mbox too.  (send+receive).

For the command line such as `reportbug` and daemon programs such as `cron` to
send mails to external hosts and local accounts, use of `exim4` as the locally
installed MTA is good idea.  With "sudo dpkg-reconfigure exim4-config", Select
"mail sent by smarthost; received via SMTP or fetchmail".  Everything else can
be default.

To use Gmail for smarthost, set up "Mail Server configuration" as
"smtp.gmail.com::587".  It is irrelevant for us to worry "Hide local mail name
..." since the smarthost service rewrites it anyway.  Edit
`/etc/exim4/passwd.client` as:
`smtp.gmail.com:foo.bar@gmail.com:application_password` (You need to create
`application_password` in advance.)

Whenever I wish to send out mails with "@debian.org" address, I use
ssh+sendmail (created shell script `~/bin/sendmail-p.d.o`) to access a Debian
host. (This trick may be usable for any hosts such as salsa.debian.org etc.)

I have mail configuration for:

* Evolution
* `devscripts` (add "`BTS_SENDMAIL_COMMAND='/home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o'`" to `~/.devscripts`)
* `reportbug` (add "`mta /home/osamu/bin/sendmail-p.d.o`" to `~/.reportbugrc`)

I usually don't bother with fetchmail these days.

### Evolution workaround (font) -- resolved

This bug is resolved: https://bugs.debian.org/987948

Evolution for Debian 11 Bullseye (pre-release) under wayland had ugly font
problem as of May 2, 2021.  (Some firefox, too).  It looked like some similar
to WebKit issue exposed by sandboxing.
https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/evolution/-/issues/1161

Installing `xdg-desktop-portal-gtk` fixed it.

## Command line

Setups:

* `~/bin` scripts: https://github.com/osamuaoki/osamu-utils (`hal`, `sendmail-p.d.o`)
    * key files in `~/` and `~/.config` are backuped to `~/bin/dot/` with "`hal conf up`"
* main editor: `nvim` configuration: https://github.com/osamuaoki/astronvim-osamu
    * NeoVim 0.7 with [AstroNvim](https://github.com/AstroNvim/AstroNvim)
    * See [Re-learning Vim (4)]({{< ref "note-00031" >}}).
* backup editor: `vim` configuration: https://github.com/osamuaoki/dot-vim
    * Custom package management of Vim 8 with native `packadd!`.
    * See [Re-learning Vim (2)]({{< ref "note-00007" >}}).

Frequent commands to use:

* `mc`: file manager for shell
* `fzf`: fuzzy finder for shell and vim.

## Test accounts

Adding extra user name for `/etc/passwd` and `/etc/shadow` with the same
UID=1000 enables useful test accounts.  Please make sure to create different
home directory for each user name.

<!-- vim: set sw=2 sts=2 ai si et tw=79 ft=markdown: -->
